Regional threats
2006-05-01

Kaoru Hayashi
Symantec Security Response
,
Japan
Editor:
Helen

Martin
Abstract
Kaoru Hayashi examines the increase in attacks that are targeted at specific geographic regions or languages.
Copyright © 2006 Virus Bulletin

Introduction
New families and new variants of threats, such as W32/Sober, W32/Blackmal and W32/Beagle, attack systems across the world every day. These threats attempt to infect any system they can reach and propagate worldwide. They can be referred to as global threats. Meanwhile, we are also seeing an increase in attacks that are targeted at specific geographic regions or languages.

Targeted attacks
An example of a targeted attack is W32/[email protected], which is an IRC bot worm based on the HellBot worm. It attempts to propagate by mass mailing and exploiting the MS05-039 vulnerability. The worm also attempts to propagate through file sharing and P2P networks. It has a list of words, such as 'kazaa', 'share' and 'download', and searches for folder names that contain any of the words in the list. If a match is found, the worm copies itself to the folder. The list includes several Chinese words, which suggests that the author of the worm is aiming to infiltrate Chinese language operating systems.
Recently, users of online games have been targeted by malware. The attacker attempts to steal account information by using trojans and can make money by selling items or virtual money through Real Money Trade (RMT) sites. Particular games tend to be popular in particular regions, hence malware targets these regions as well. Trojan/Okarag and PWSteal/Wayi are examples of trojans that attempt to steal information from certain games that are popular in Asia, and close the windows of several security products, including Chinese security products. Some adware and spyware programs also target specific regions or languages.

W32/Antinny
W32/Antinny is a worm that targets the Winny P2P file-sharing network. It is the most notorious worm in Japan. Winny was developed by an anonymous author called Mr 47, and is available only for Japanese versions of Windows. In much the same way as other P2P programs, a lot of people use Winny for file sharing.
When I first saw the W32/Antinny worm in 2003, I was interested in two points: the fact that it was the first worm for the Japanese P2P environment and the fact that it utilizes Japanese words for file names. Obviously this means that the worm cannot propagate globally and resides only on Japanese Windows with Winny – so, initially, I thought the worm wouldn’t be a significant problem. However, I was wrong.
A few variants later, W32/Antinny had a payload that would cause significant social problems: information leaking. The worm searches many files, such as Office documents, text, email boxes, photos and movie files on the compromised computer. It archives those files in a zip file with a gripping name in Japanese and then copies the file to the upload folder, which allows other Winny users to search for and download it from the Winny P2P network. Therefore, Winny users were suddenly finding lots of private information in the download files instead of what they were expecting.
Table 1 contains some examples of the information leaked by W32/Antinny as reported in the media last year. In some cases, highly sensitive information was leaked by the worm.
Date
Source
Information
December 9, 2005
Air Carrier
The password for restricted areas in an airport
December 9, 2005
University Teaching Hospital
Information about three patients, including patient name and history for both the patients and their families
December 8, 2005
Power Company
Nuclear plant meeting minutes and documents
November 6, 2005
Public Hospital
Information about a dozen patients
November 14, 2005
Prefectural Office
Personal details of 354 staff members, including names, addresses, and bank accounts
November 17, 2005
Police Department
Home addresses of 33 police officers
September 16, 2005
Power Company
Technical documents of a thermal power plant and customer information
August 30, 2005
Heavy Industry Company
Maps, photos and inspection report of a power plant
July 21, 2005
Public Agency
Inspection report of a nuclear power plant
June 27, 2005
Police Department
Documents of criminal investigations, including personal information about suspects and eyewitnesses
June 23, 2005
Electric Company
Inspection reports and photos of 27 power plants, including seven nuclear power plants
Table 1. Examples of information leaked by W32/Antinny.
According to Virus Bulletin's malware prevalence table [1], instances of W32/Antinny have consistently been very low. For example, the number of instances of W32/Antinny in October 2005 was just 11, representing less than 0.01% of all virus reports in that month. However, in November 2005, Microsoft reported that in one month it had removed more than 200,000 W32/Antinny files from 110,000 computers using the Malware Removal Tool in Windows Update [2]. The company also stated that a few hundred thousand machines were still infected with the worm. This must be the first verified case of a regional threat having propagated on such a large scale.

Two issues with regional threats
Acquisition and analysis of samples can be problematic where regional threats are concerned. If an AV company does not have a local office or support, it may be difficult to acquire enough samples of the threat. Most AV and security companies provide customers with a variety of ways to submit samples, such as by email, or via the Internet. However, most of these methods are presented in English or another specific language. If the user is not familiar with the language, they may hesitate to submit the sample through those means.
Global threats, such as W32/Sober and W32/Beagle, are reported by many people in many different countries. But regional threats are reported by a limited number of people in limited places. Such samples may easily be overlooked or assigned a low priority.
The next issue is analysis. As mentioned earlier, many regional threats contain languages other than English. An unfamiliar language in a threat can cause delay in analysis or even insufficient analysis. For example, PWSteal/Bancos.AA checks the Internet Explorer window text and starts logging key strokes if it matches with certain strings. Most of the strings are in English, but there are a few strings in Russian as well. These could easily be missed or ignored.
Technology can also be an issue in cases where we find files that are developed with particular tools. Trojan/Kakkeys was originally written in Ruby script language and converted into a Windows PE executable file by Ruby-Exerb [3]. Hot Soup Processor (HSP) [4] is another example. It is a kind of basic language and is also able to create Windows PE executable files. We found some tiny trojans written in HSP. Both Ruby-Exerb and HSP were developed and used mostly in Japan. The PE file that is created with those tools contains huge runtime code so that the file seems clean at first glance. These files are likely to be false positives or false negatives.
Along with understanding foreign languages and technologies, analysts also need some knowledge of regional software usage. Winny is available only for Japanese versions of Windows and is the most popular P2P program in Japan. QQMessenger [5] is the most popular IM program in China.
Even without understanding the specific language or the software that the threat targets, analysts can analyse the threat and recognize what it is or what it does. But it is likely they will provide insufficient analysis, and give a lower priority to the analysis of the threat. It is reported that more than 4 billion accounts of QQMessenger exist and 20 million users are online at any one time [6]. If a new worm that targets only QQMessenger is released, it will be a big problem – but only in specific regions.

Conclusion
Fortunately, only a few regional threats have become significant problems recently. However, anyone can obtain malicious code or ideas from the Internet and use them for profit-gain, and the number and variety of threats – including regional threats – will continue to rise. To gain profit, authors of malware don't need to create a threat that attacks computers worldwide. There is a lot of software that supports local languages only, and in certain regions (particularly China and Japan), such programs and services are more popular than ones that support only English.
AV and security companies need to be careful to acquire and analyse samples. If it's difficult to acquire samples from some regions, cooperation with other groups, companies or local organizations may be necessary in order to support customers in those regions. Even if a file looks clean, it's possible that the file spreads rapidly but only on specific language operating systems, hardware, software or services we have never heard of.

Bibliography
[1] http://www.virusbtn.com/resources/malwareDirectory/prevalence/.
[2] http://www.microsoft.com/japan/presspass/detail.aspx?newsid=2504.
[3] http://exerb.sourceforge.jp/index.en.html.
[4] http://www.onionsoft.net/hsp/.
[5] http://www.tencent.com/.
[6] http://comm.ccidnet.com/art/1522/20051026/358525_1.html.
