Up2Date 7.507 Released

We have released Up2Date 7.507 for ASG installations to address an issue around Unix Time which can affect the use of certificates, and thus your ASG installation. This up2date package should be applied before the end of August if possible.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

August 12, 2010

Network up2date

We have released Up2Date 7.507 for ASG installations to address an issue around Unix Time which can affect the use of certificates, and thus your ASG installation. This up2date package should be applied before the end of August if possible.

ASG uses certificates for different purposes (such as for each user that is created) and CAs (certificate authorities) for signing the certificates mentioned before. When performing the initial setup, some CAs as well as the admin certificate are generated.
When passing a certain point in time the theoretical end-date for our certs and CAs is beyond 19 January 2038 which will cause trouble to the system as the end-date of a cert/CA must not be before the start-date.
*SUMMARY NOTICE*
Any and all systems which have this up2date applied before the end of August 2010 will be completely free from troubles or consequences as a result of this global Linux/Unix issue. If you apply it, you can avoid needing to educate yourself further.
For units which are not updated before then, we will issue a single fix for this bug via a specially crafted pattern Up2Date as well, which will be automatically patched/applied without updating the firmware version.
If you would like more education on this issue, you can read more about it here via Wikipedia’s entry: Year 2038 problem.
Official Details
Remarks:

Configuration will not be upgraded
System will be rebooted

News:

This Up2Date should be applied before end of August 2010

Fixes:

Fix [14657] Overflow in certificate creation will cause invalid certificates

Manual Package Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.507.tgz.gpg
Md5: 321e9f87525bc36dcfdd9531a6a1e5a0
Size: 8,147,144 bytes (Approx 8MB)
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version.  There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:
1) Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
2) Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:
Astaro AxG Up2Date Download Mirrors:

Astaro US
Astaro US2
Astaro Germany
Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.507] Astaro Web Content Filter Profiles Question").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server: http://demo.astaro.com (All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!)

Regards,
The Astaro Product Management Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
