Sophos UTM Manager 4 Released

Today we have officially released Sophos UTM Manager 4. The next evolution of the product formerly known as Astaro Command Center (ACC), Sophos UTM Manager (SUM) 4 lets you centrally monitor, configure, and report on multiple Sophos UTM installations. Like ACC, SUM is offered completely free of charge, simply download it and run it on your own hardware, almost any virtualization platform (Eg. VMware) or inside the Amazon Cloud using our pre-built AMI. If you have not yet had the chance, I'd invite you to try this product today! SUM 4 introduces a sleek new look with the same DNA as Sophos UTM 9, a brand new import mechanic for bringing in existing objects from your UTMs so they can be re-deployed using our object management system, the ability to manage your UTM Endpoint policies, and a focus on improved performance and reduced bandwidth consumption when managing large amounts of UTMs. You do not need dozens of installations to benefit from the information gathering and time savings of Sophos UTM Manager. Many administrators use it to easy their logins, since once authenticated to SUM, the WebAdmin of any connected UTM device with a single click.   A summary of what is new in Sophos UTM Manager 4, how to download it, and other information follows. For those on our existing Astaro Command Center V3 platform, you will need to install SUM 4 and install a backup from your ACC 3 installation. Read on for extended release information.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

November 02, 2012

Network up2date

Today we have officially released Sophos UTM Manager 4. The next evolution of the product formerly known as Astaro Command Center (ACC), Sophos UTM Manager (SUM) 4 lets you centrally monitor, configure, and report on multiple Sophos UTM installations. Like ACC, SUM is offered completely free of charge, simply download it and run it on your own hardware, almost any virtualization platform (Eg. VMware) or inside the Amazon Cloud using our pre-built AMI. If you have not yet had the chance, I’d invite you to try this product today!
SUM 4 introduces a sleek new look with the same DNA as Sophos UTM 9, a brand new import mechanic for bringing in existing objects from your UTMs so they can be re-deployed using our object management system, the ability to manage your UTM Endpoint policies, and a focus on improved performance and reduced bandwidth consumption when managing large amounts of UTMs. You do not need dozens of installations to benefit from the information gathering and time savings of Sophos UTM Manager. Many administrators use it to easy their logins, since once authenticated to SUM, the WebAdmin of any connected UTM device with a single click.
A summary of what is new in Sophos UTM Manager 4, how to download it, and other information follows. For those on our existing Astaro Command Center V3 platform, you will need to install SUM 4 and install a backup from your ACC 3 installation. Read on for extended release information.

*An important note about accessing SUM for the first time: There are two different "admin" GUI’s – The traditional WebAdmin on port 4444 (eg. https://x.x.x.x:4444) is used for configuring the device, user accounts, and other administrative functions for the installation itself. The Gateway Manager on port 4422 (Eg. https://x.x.x.x:4422) is used to access the management, monitoring, reporting, and configuration of your connected sites. The Gateway Manager is where you will spend the majority of your time once you have SUM setup.
Once SUM is initially setup, (and with your UTM installations configured to connect to SUM, upon login to the Gateway Manager you will see the overview and status information for your connected installations. Besides information and monitoring there are many configuration features; you can define network and service objects, firewall rules, or web protection profiles, then issue them to some (or all) of your UTMs. Choose to make a VPN tunnel between two sites via a quick wizard, and run aggregated reports for any combination of locations.
Sophos UTM Manager 4 Feature Summary

GUI in Sophos design: new UTM9-Style Sophos design.
Simplified initial setup: after installation, SUM will now automatically accept connections from UTM devices from "any" network and the gateway manager will be already configured for the admin user. All you need to do by default to join a UTM to SUM is to configure the Central Management section of your UTM to point to SUM. (Security can be tightened to restrict access via source networks, add a password required for joining, and other measures via SUM WebAdmin)
Global object import: Allow for importing objects from a UTM to SUM, where they can then be used as global objects. (Objects are not tied to the imported UTM.)
Single Sign-On Redesign (username passthrough): The Single Sign-On mechanism now uses the two access roles used in SUM (admin, auditor). Also, login to the UTM is now done with the SUM for tracking purposes (instead of the old CM__admin/CM__audit).
Scalability / Bandwidth Usage: You should notice significant savings in the amount of bandwidth consumed by your SUM and UTM installations for communicating.
Global EP policy Management: You can now manage UTM Endpoint AntiVirus and Device-Control policies (UTM 9 features) from within SUM.
Message Queue: A dedicated view shows a table of the most recent events on the SUM. Event can be anything that triggered a notification, along with SUM shutdown/restarts.
Guid Setting: Allows you to set the guid of a device from SUM. This is useful for when an existing ASG/UTM is for example re-imaged, and reconnects to SUM with a new guid. The two devices can then be merged, such that in SUM there is only one device (with the old guid)
Gateway manager login from WebAdmin: It is now possible to use the new "Gateway Manager" tab & button in SUM WebAdmin to be instantly taken to the SUM Gateway Manager
Install on UTM Hardware: It is now possible to install SUM on UTM hardware appliances. (Note this will completely format and re-purpose the appliance as SUM, it will no longer be a UTM!) While SUM is designed to be installed on your own, dedicated hardware platform, virtual machine, or Amazon Cloud instance, you asked us to be able to run SUM on UTM appliance hardware, and we’ve enabled that.

Pricing Information
Sophos UTM Manager 4 (like Astaro Command Center before it) is totally free for personal AND business use, no strings, no catches! However, you still will require a license key. You generate a personal key from MyAstaro (in the same way that you might generate a free home-user key)
Download Information
SUM 4 ISO Image (Existing customers install and then restore your ACC backup file)
ISO Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.com/SUM/v4/software_appliance/iso/acc-4.000-2.1.iso
ISO Size: ~387 MBISO MD5Sum: a9ab0a9ab7f8e116943b2396c39effd6
SUM 4 VMware Images: (We have packages for ESX 4, 5 and VMware player. Choose wisely)
VMware ESX v4 x64 Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-esx-v4-x64-smp.zip
VMware ESX v4 x86 Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-esx-v4-x86-smp.zip
VMware ESX v5 x64 Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-esx-v5-x64-smp.zip
VMware ESX v5 x86 Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-esx-v5-x86-smp.zip
VMware  x64 Link:  ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-vmware-x64-smp.zip
VMware  x86 Link:  ftp://ftp.astaro.de/SUM/v4/virtual_appliance/sum-4.000-vmware-x86-smp.zip
For existing customers, your ACC V3 key is still valid.
For new users, to get your new SUM 4 key, fill out the creation form on our website. Your personalized license will then be available via the License Management section of your MyAstaro account.

Sophos UTM Manager FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the SUM 4 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[4.000] Central Backup Management Question").

If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.

There will also soon be a SUM demo server for public use at our demo server area within the next weeks.

Enjoy Sophos UTM Manager,
Angelo Comazzetto

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
