Save your work! Microsoft Releases Critical Security Patch
As expected, Microsoft has released a critical out-of-band patch for the LNK shortcut file vulnerability which received attention last month. As a critical patch, this update will be delivered through Windows’ Automatic Update service, as well as being directly available for download from Microsoft’s site without a Windows Genuine Advantage check. A reboot is required for the

2 Aug 2010 - 11:57AM

As expected, Microsoft has released a critical out-of-band patch for the LNK shortcut file vulnerability which received attention last month. As a critical patch, this update will be delivered through Windows’ Automatic Update service, as well as being directly available for download from Microsoft’s site without a Windows Genuine Advantage check. A reboot is required for the

As expected, Microsoft has released a critical out-of-band patch for the LNK shortcut file vulnerability which received attention last month. As a critical patch, this update will be delivered through Windows’ Automatic Update service, as well as being directly available for download from Microsoft’s site without a Windows Genuine Advantage check. A reboot is required for the patch to take effect.

Windows users can download and install the patch themselves, or allow Microsoft to apply it to their computer overnight using the Automatic Update service. If you choose the latter, be sure to save any open work on your computer before leaving the computer for the evening. Otherwise, you may find a freshly booted system when go to your PC the following morning.

Information about the vulnerability, along with the patch, can be found in the following Microsoft Security Bulletin:

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS10-046 – Critical Vulnerability in Windows Shell Could Allow Remote Code Execution (2286198)

Here is a list of all articles we have written about CVE-2010-2568 (the Common Vulnerability and Exposure number assigned to the threat) in the blog, as well as malware using it as a vector, such as Win32/Stuxnet.

Date

Article

July 27

More LNK exploiting malware, by Jove!*

July 23

Link Exploits and the Search for a Better Explorer

July 22

A few facts about Win32/Stuxnet & CVE-2010-2568

July 22

New malicious LNKs: here we go…

July 22

Why Steal Digital Certificates?

July 22

Win32/Stuxnet: more news and resources

July 20

There’s Passwording and there’s Security

July 19

It Wasn’t an Army

July 19

Win32/Stuxnet Signed Binaries

July 19

Yet more on Win32/Stuxnet

July 19

(Windows) Shellshocked, Or Why Win32/Stuxnet Sux…

We recommend that people begin deploying the patch as soon as possible. While ESET’s software protects against the malware currently known to exploit this vulnerability, installing Microsoft’s patch closes the vulnerability on the operating system.

Regards,

Aryeh Goretsky, MVP, ZCSE
Distinguished Researcher
