iPhone (in)security in the enterprise – Followup

Posted by Roger on 7 April 2010, 8:32 pm

Back in November I wrote a summary of several concerns we have about the iPhone in the enterprise.
Four months later lets take a look at see what’s changed.
One of the other guys at work took that list of concerns to our AT&T rep, who then took them to a unnamed, untitled Apple contact. Next they ran it the questions by the magic 8 ball. The responses are below.
Problem 1: Encryption and PIN bypasses reported at iPhoneinsecurity.com
Apple’s Response:
We take iPhone security very seriously and have made consistent improvements in all areas.For example, in the most recent iPhone 3.1.3 update we made the changes detailed in the following KB – http://support.apple.com/kb/HT4013 One to highlight is CVE-ID: CVE-2010-0038 related to recovery mode. This is a big improvement to thwart those who are using tools to modify the iPhone software.
That doesn’t really answer the question though. Is the encryption bypass which Zdziarski is only talking to law enforcement about fixed or not? Due to the lack of public disclosure there is no way to know. Zdziarski does mention using recovery mode so it is possible that the attack is patched. But I dont give the benefit of the doubt to non-disclosers.
I suppose some would argue that the evil maid attack allows bypass of Full Disk Encryption on computers so I shouldn’t have my data there either. Of course using a smart card or bitlocker with TPM I could protect myself from this attack.
The evil maid attack requires an attacker to have physical access to the device. Then I log in. The the maid returns to harvest the results. The iPhone encryption bypass can occur when you leave the iPhone unattended for a few minutes. I dont think that is comparable.
2. iphoneinsecurity shows a password bypass in addition to the encryption bypass.
Apple’s” response indicates that the enterprise passcode policy is completely different than the consumer four diget pin and thus not vulnerable. I’m not sure I’m buying that.
3. Lack of Centralized Config Management
Apple’s Response indicates that its possible to force the iphone to have enterprises configuration in order to be able to connect in order to connect to the enterprise. I’m not sure exactly how that is supposed to be done.
Further Apple claims that the iPhone is more secure than the Blackberry because its Unix. Its also more secure because you can only run one application at a time and every app is approved by Apple. lolz.
4. Patching
With the BES we can deploy them as forced updates over the air.
Apple’s Response:
We (Apple) don’t view them as patches, but as major, free OS upgrades and updates..a typical OS update for us is 200-300 meg ( very unwieldy to do OTA) and is packed with useful new features , security upgrades, OS enhancements, etc…
“we dont view them as patches”. Sorry, I didn’t read the rest. Laughing too hard.
5. iTunes
Apple Responded that its best practice to not supply full itunes to everyone. Apparently there is some way to skinny down itunes so its basically a sync software.
6. App Store
This issue goes back to is this a business device or not. Are the users going to have the device on their Apple account and take the applications with them or what?
Apple’s response was basically, yes the user takes the app with them when they leave the company even though the company bought the app.
7. Jailbroken phones maybe less secure.
Apple’s response is dont let jailbroken phones connect to the network. No word on how to do that. Authentication alone doesn’t do that. Is ActiveSync going to check for that? I think not.
8. Repeaters. This is more an ATT issue. If we buy X iphone’s can we get repeaters for free.
