UTM 9.002 Up2Date Released

This week we have issued Up2Date 9.002 for our UTM 9 platform. This is a stability release designed to further polish the UTM 9 platform and make it ready for an influx of thousands in the coming weeks as we publish the Hardware Appliance Up2Date that enables the one-touch upgrade from Astaro Security Gateway V8 appliance users*. *A note on ASG 8.306: We plan to release 8.306 later in September which will add in the ability to one-touch upgrade. Once 8.306 is installed we will selectively activate regions in a sort of phased roll-out over a few weeks by issuing a special pattern via the pattern channel that "unlocks" the upgrade button. We will have more information for you on how that process works when the release is available. I wanted to mention it here to avoid any confusion when installing ASG 8.306 and not seeing the button to get to UTM 9 immediately. Keep in mind that will only be for official hardware appliances, software installations must re-install & restore a backup as usual. As promised in 9.001 announcment, we now have an entirely new demo server environment with bigger, faster machines, more instances, and massive improvements all around. We are still updating all the various links to them, but you can click here to be redirected to a demo UTM 9. Enjoy!

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

September 13, 2012

Network up2date

This week we have issued Up2Date 9.002 for our UTM 9 platform. This is a stability release designed to further polish the UTM 9 platform and make it ready for an influx of thousands in the coming weeks as we publish the Hardware Appliance Up2Date that enables the one-touch upgrade from Astaro Security Gateway V8 appliance users*.
*A note on ASG 8.306: We plan to release 8.306 later in September which will add in the ability to one-touch upgrade. Once 8.306 is installed we will selectively activate regions in a sort of phased roll-out over a few weeks by issuing a special pattern via the pattern channel that "unlocks" the upgrade button. We will have more information for you on how that process works when the release is available. I wanted to mention it here to avoid any confusion when installing ASG 8.306 and not seeing the button to get to UTM 9 immediately. Keep in mind that will only be for official hardware appliances, software installations must re-install & restore a backup as usual.
As promised in 9.001 announcment, we now have an entirely new demo server environment with bigger, faster machines, more instances, and massive improvements all around. We are still updating all the various links to them, but you can click here to be redirected to a demo UTM 9. Enjoy!

Sophos UTM 9.002 Up2Date Information
News:

Bug fix release
Fixed: Issues with translated Quarantine Reports

Remarks:

System will be rebooted
Configuration will be upgraded

Bugfixes:

[21960] HTML5 VPN: Problems with dropdown menus

Download:
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/UTM/v9/up2date/u2d-sys-9.002012.tgz.gpg
Size: ~91MB
MD5: e0a24004e33eb78fa4e9942813fc27c7
Up2Date Installation:
Sophos Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your Sophos UTM to the latest version. There are two ways to apply an already-downloaded Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

Sophos UTM Up2Date FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the UTM V9 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[9.002] Configuring wireless guest access using hotspots").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.
There is also a demo server environment for public use.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
