Up2Date 7.505 Released

Hello! Up2Date 7.505 has started to push to installations. This version is mainly to update some ASG code in preparation for the imminent GA release of the Astaro RED product. In addition, there are some fixes, stability changes, and we have also released a few new features. Added are support for multiple syslog servers, a read-only WebAdmin role, and XAUTH support in site-site IPSEC Tunnels.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

May 20, 2010

Network up2date

Hello! Up2Date 7.505 has started to push to installations. This version is mainly to update some ASG code in preparation for the imminent GA release of the Astaro RED product. In addition, there are some fixes, stability changes, and we have also released a few new features. Added are support for multiple syslog servers, a read-only WebAdmin role, and XAUTH support in site-site IPSEC Tunnels.

As part of our extending the home user licensing to 50 IP addresses last winter, we now are introducing a small change to the customization ability of installations using ASG at home. Focused around the Web Security block page (and other customization areas), a "home-user only" notice will appear and customizations of these types of pages is now limited. This allows us to continue to offer such a large amount of total protection for free home use without any other limitations. Full details of V7.505 are below…
Official Details
Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.505.tgz.gpg
Size: 142MB
MD5Sum: f75b4cc3ff92996c07f455c9f35fe0f1
Remarks:

Configuration will be upgraded
System will be rebooted
Connected RED devices will perform firmware upgrade
RED USERS: Your device will perform a firmware upgrade (blinking LEDs) – do not power off the RED unit while upgrading, as this can cause firmware problems.

News:

New Feature: Read-only WebAdmin user role
New Feature: Support for multiple syslog servers
New Feature: XAuth Support for Site-Site IPSEC Tunnels
Restricted customization capabilities for Home-User Licensed Installations
For the new things in ASG 7.5 you can view the Release Notes here.

Fixes:
[11239]: New Yahoo messenger not detected by IM/P2P security
[11496]: State of additional addresses remains at DOWN after the daily reconnect
[11621]: Packet filter is dropping own DNS replies
[11780]: IPsec Remote Access Errors
[11844]: Cannot use HTTPS scanning in a profile if HTTPS is not enabled for the global settings.
[11857]: Serial numbers showing up as "MISSING" in the WebAdmin dashboard
[12956]: Static routes missing in back end when activating High Availability
[13690]: Removed debug messages in kernel log on HA/Cluster with IPsec

Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version.     There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:
Astaro AxG Up2Date Download Mirrors:
– Astaro US
– Astaro US2
– Astaro Germany
– Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.505] Syslog Server Settings ").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documenation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server: http://demo.astaro.com     (All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!)

Cheers,
Your Astaro Product Management Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
