Sophos UTM Manager 4.102 Released

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

July 17, 2013

Network up2date

We have made available an Up2Date for our Sophos UTM Manager. UTM Manager is your tool for centrally monitoring, maintaining, and configuring multiple Sophos UTM installations. This is an enhancement that adds some improvements for the newly-introduced MSP program licensing and billing system. If you offer managed services (or are looking to start) and are interested in signing up as an MSP, you should contact your sales representative at Sophos.
*A note about old SUM versions: SUM 4.1 is a new branch built upon a significantly evolved platform than SUM 4.0. As a result, if you are running SUM 4.0 and wish to move to SUM 4.1, you will need to restore a backup file into a new SUM 4.1 installation. Up2Date from SUM 4.0 -> 4.1 is not/will not be possible.
Read on for extended release information.

An important note about accessing SUM for the first time: There are two different “admin” GUI’s – The traditional WebAdmin on port 4444 (eg. https://x.x.x.x:4444) is used for configuring the device, user accounts, and other administrative functions for the installation itself. The Gateway Manager on port 4422 (Eg. https://x.x.x.x:4422) is used to access the management, monitoring, reporting, and configuration of your connected sites. The Gateway Manager is where you will spend the majority of your time once you have SUM setup.

Once SUM is initially setup, (and with your UTM installations configured to connect to SUM) upon login to the Gateway Manager you will see the overview and status information for your connected installations. Besides information and monitoring there are many configuration features; you can define network and service objects, firewall rules, or web protection profiles, then issue them to some (or all) of your UTMs. Choose to make a VPN tunnel between two sites via a quick wizard, and run aggregated reports for any combination of locations.
Sophos UTM Manager 4.102
News

Update to 4.102
Download license pack automatically if it’s not found
Show msp status bar errors sent from backend
Implement new notifications for the GatewayManager
Convert utc times shown on msp log page to local times
Create page to show connection status to the license portal

Remarks

System will be rebooted
Configuration will be upgraded

Bugfixes

No bugfixes in this release

Download Information
Up2Date file: http://ftp.astaro.com/SUM/v4/up2date/u2d-sys-4.102007.tgz.gpg
MD5 Sum: 65ba97d504b760525897f914dc5adeb7
Size: ~170MB
Pricing and Licensing

Sophos UTM Manager 4.1 (like Astaro Command Center which it replaces) is totally free for personal AND business use, no strings, no catches! However, you still will require a license key. You can register and receive a UTM manager key via this registration page if you do not already have one).
For existing customers, your Astaro Command Center V3/ SUM V4 key is still valid.
For new users, to get your new SUM 4.1 key, fill out the creation form on our website. Your personalized license will then be available via the License Management section of your MyAstaro account.

Sophos UTM Manager FTP Mirrors:

Feedback
-If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the SUM 4.1 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. “[4.103] Central Backup Management Question”).
-There will also soon be a SUM demo server for public use at our demo server area within the next weeks.
Enjoy Sophos UTM Manager,
Angelo Comazzetto

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn

1
