ACC 1.300 released [middle]

This new ISO and Up2Date introduces new ACC features:

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

October 10, 2006

Network up2date

This new ISO and Up2Date introduces new ACC features:

Enhanced Fine-Grained Access Control for the Role-Based Multi- Admin System
Real-Time Monitoring of High Availability Bundles
Local ASG Up2Date Cache
Dashboard List-View
Backup and Restore of ACC Data

… and a lot smaller improvements and bugfixes. It also increases the number of supported devices to 500.

The new features in detail:
Enhanced Fine-Grained Access Control for the Role-Based Multi- Admin System
Different administrator roles (for monitoring, maintenance and configuration) can now be  defined for each device or device group via an easy to use point and click menu. This increases flexibility in regard to granting dedicated administrator rights for specific areas within large network environments (e.g. for different regions). In addition, permission can be automatically granted to newly confirmed devices through pre-defined rules.
Real-Time Monitoring of High Availability Bundles
A new "Hardware" category has been allocated to the device monitoring section, allowing for real-time status monitoring of critical High Availability (HA) components. For instance, the name, version and last contact status for all HA bundle devices, (master and slave), will now be shown within list-views and also depicted as color coded icons within the dashboard. This up-to-date information will ensure that administrators are always aware about critical component states requiring immediate action, preventing possible system outages.
Local ASG Up2Date Cache
The Astaro Command Center server now acts as a local Up2Date server (cache), providing  pre-fetched Up2Date packages for all Astaro Security Gateways within a customers network  environment. This reduces internet traffic significantly as each package is only downloaded once.  Furthermore, the server also allows for the centralized update of ASGs which do not have a direct internet connection.
Dashboard List-View
This new type of list-view works to aggregate the summary information available from the  dashboard, creating lists that can be sorted by each individual parameter (overall status, on/offline, threat level, resource level, version level and license level). In large environments, this view will provide an improved overview about specific device  parameters.
Backup and Restore of ACC Data
This function allows a backup/restore of the actual data stored within ACC.
Increased Number of Supported Devices
The number of supported devices is increased to 500. Besides these top feature there are a lot of smaller improvements and small fixes. The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Command Center to the latest version: Start the Up2Date under "ACC Management >> Maintenance". All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!
Virtual Appliance
ACC V1.3 will be also made available as a VMWare virtual appliance. Similar to the ASG virtual appliance, ACC can be easily deployed within VMWare virtualized environments, such as VMWare Server, VMWare ESX Server, VMWare Workstation or VMWare Player, by using a pre-configured/pre-installed ACC ISO.
Download Information
Astaro Command Center 1.300 ISO or VMWare image
FTP server:  – Germany – Germany 2 – US – US 2 – Japanese Mirror
HTTP server:  – Germany – Germany 2 – US – US 2 – Japanese Mirror
(Size: 257 MB (257,275,904 Byte) md5sum: 7d0db749cbfb0e0963c42195d0d20f60)
Hardware requirements for ACC
Our minimum recommendation for ACC V1 installations:

Intel Pentium IV IV (2.4 GHz) / AMD Athlon XP 2500
512 MB RAM (1GB recommended)
40 GB hard disk drive
1 PCI NIC

Please check the ASL V6 hardware compatibility list (HCL) on our knowledge base for supported SCSI controller and NICs
Supported web browser
Astaro Command Center will support the following browser/platform combinations:
MS Windows 2000/XP/Vista

IE6 or higher (including IE7)
Mozilla Firefox 1.5 or higher

Linux:

Mozilla Firefox 1.5 or higher

Mac OSX:

Safari 2.0.3 or higher
Mozilla Firefox 1.5 or higher

Other browsers could also work, but might be subject to rendering or JavaScript issues. They are unsupported. Java or Flash support is not needed. We recommend Firefox as web browser on a system with at least 512 MB RAM and a CPU with 1.5 GHz or more.
Licensing
You do not need a license to use ACC V1 (yeah, it’s free!).

Enjoy,
Astaro R&D Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
