ASG 8.307 Up2Date Released

An Up2Date has been released for ASG 8.307 that optimizes the one-touch update to UTM 9 for supported official appliances, and contains some security patches for the Astaro Security Gateway platform. Supported ASG appliances are unlocked and ready for upgrading you to UTM 9 (if you don't see the upgrade option in your Up2Date section, be patient - it will take some hours to fully spread. Note that if you have already downloaded the one-touch upgrade on your appliance, you will need to re-download it so it can use the updated process and bring you to 9.004+ directly. For more information, read on for the rest of the details.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

November 21, 2012

Network up2date

An Up2Date has been released for ASG 8.307 that optimizes the one-touch update to UTM 9 for supported official appliances, and contains some security patches for the Astaro Security Gateway platform. Supported ASG appliances are unlocked and ready for upgrading you to UTM 9 (if you don’t see the upgrade option in your Up2Date section, be patient – it will take some hours to fully spread.
Note that if you have already downloaded the one-touch upgrade on your appliance, you will need to re-download it so it can use the updated process and bring you to 9.004+ directly. For more information, read on for the rest of the details.

ASG 8.307 Up2Date Details
News﻿
• Security Update for SMTP Proxy (Exim CVE-2012-5671)
• Fixed issues with UTM V9 Upgrade and V8 Up2Date interaction
Remarks
• System will be rebooted
• Should be installed before attempting UTM V9 Upgrade
• UTM V9 Upgrade needs to be downloaded again if it already was
Bugfixes
No bugfixes in this release
Download:
Link: ftp.astaro.com/ASG/v8/up2date/u2d-sys-8.307.tgz.gpg
MD5: da4b637d5a853c3a2f6005cbcfed245f
Size: ~23MB
Up2Date Installation:
Sophos Up2Date technology makes it easy to update your Astaro Security Gateway. There are two ways to apply an already-downloaded Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

ASG Up2Date FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG or UTM features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[8.307] Configuring IPS for my Network").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.
There are also UTM 9 demo server environments for public use.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
