Up2Date 7.508 Released – Upgrade Appliances to Version 8

This morning, ASG version 7.508 has been released. The focus of this package is a one-touch upgrade from ASG version 7 to version 8 for ASG appliances, along with some final polish to accommodate the GA-release of our Wireless Security products. The appliance upgrade process provides an easy migration from V7 to V8 without the need to manually re-install the AstaroOS and restore from a backup file. Once the appliance upgrade has started via the Up2Date section, ASG V8 will be installed and all configuration will be imported. We have also improved the IPS engine and added outbound spam scanning into the V7 platform like V8. Read on for more details about the appliance migration process and other notes.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

November 15, 2010

Network up2date

This morning, ASG version 7.508 has been released. The focus of this package is a one-touch upgrade from ASG version 7 to version 8 for ASG appliances, along with some final polish to accommodate the GA-release of our Wireless Security products. The appliance upgrade process provides an easy migration from V7 to V8 without the need to manually re-install the AstaroOS and restore from a backup file. Once the appliance upgrade has started via the Up2Date section, ASG V8 will be installed and all configuration will be imported. We have also improved the IPS engine and added outbound spam scanning into the V7 platform like V8. Read on for more details about the appliance migration process and other notes.

Appliance Upgrade Process Overview:
This V7 to V8 appliance upgrade will retain all configuration and settings, including the current  contents of the spam quarantine. Note that log files will be cleared and reports will begin  anew, so customers should be sure to first download and archive their  old logs using the various methods provided in WebAdmin. This will be one of the final content updates for ASG V7 with only maintenance patches planned for the future.
Important things to note about the appliance upgrade process:

After the upgrade process is complete, the ASG will be at version 8.003. The target landing version will change over time to land upgraders at newer versions (like 8.100) once they are released.
The one-touch upgrade process is only  available to ASG appliance users. Software installations have various hardware configurations and the viability of an upgrade without the hardware detection process of the installer cannot be guaranteed. Software installations however can still easily move  to version 8 by installing the ISO image and  restoring a V7 backup file from version 7.507 or greater.
Customers with Wireless Security on their license will not be able to perform a one-touch upgrade for now, since Wireless functionality is not yet in the stable release version 8.003. If you attempt to perform an upgrade where Wireless is licensed, an error message will be displayed and the upgrade will not continue. When 8.100 is GA released near the end of November, the landing target will be updated afterwards and this condition will be removed at that time. Note that Wireless Security is present within Full Guard license bundles as well, regardless of whether it is being used.
To ensure quality and stability, customers using High Availability or Clustering configurations will not be able to one-touch upgrade their appliances. These installations can de-configure their nodes and then upgrade them each in turn or install Version 8 via the ISO image.
Old revisions of the ASG 110/120/220 with 512 megabytes of memory do not meet the minimum hardware requirements (1 Gigabyte) for ASG Version 8, and are not able to one-touch upgrade as a result.

UpDate 7.508 Details
Remarks:

Configuration will be upgraded
System will be rebooted
Connected REDs will perform firmware upgrade (do not reboot them during this process)
Connected APs will perform firmware upgrade (do not reboot them during this process)

News:

Added Wireless Security support (GA)
Added option to one-touch upgrade to V8 for hardware appliances
Introduced outbound spam scanning support
Improved IPS engine

Fixes:

[ID11371] – eDirectory authentication may stop working when no BaseDN is specified
[ID11932] – WAN connectivity hangs when changing the "daily reconnect" time on a PPPoE interface
[ID12449] – ASG conflicts when using special character ")" in PPPoE password
[ID12539] – Pushed dns servers are randomly not used
[ID13085] – HTTP Proxy restarts in a loop
[ID13126] – Link status of LAG interfaces terminology changes
[ID14089] – Antispam daemon restarts frequently during certain scenarios
[ID14654] – Blank Executive Report
[ID14404] – UDP flood protection blocks RED traffic

Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/Astaro_Security_Gateway/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.508.tgz.gpg
Size: 175 MB (183,690,474 Bytes)
MD5: 9fdff2f4bf185b1b71d4c17f6594606f
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version. There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date    >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

Astaro ASG Up2Date Download Mirrors:

Astaro US
Astaro US2
Astaro Germany
Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[8.003] Web Application Security Question").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server for public use: http://demo.astaro.com

Regards,
Angelo Comazzetto
Astaro Product Manager

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
