ASL V5.1 available

We are pleased to announce Astaro Security Linux V5.1!

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

December 01, 2004

Network up2date

We are pleased to announce Astaro Security Linux V5.1!

Updates/Bugfixes

Upgrade to SpamAssassin 3.01 with the following powerful extensions:
+ Razor2 (online database spam check)
+ DCC (online database spam check)
+ SURBL (spam realtime blocklist)
Backend bugfixes for backup converter/licensing/logging/reporting
Overall system performance increase
new kernel with bugfixed conntrack code

New Features

Additional features for better junk mail control:
+ Greylisting (Advanced spam blocking method)
+ BATV reverse path signing (Block virus and spam backscatter)
+ Checking SPF records (Joe-Job/Phishing protection)
SNMP trap support
Bandwidth monitoring capabilities with notifications if bandwidth usage exceeds/below defined percentage
Improved Proxy Content Manager
Daily proxy content manager digest sent by email for every user

Backup files from ASL V5.027 will work on ASL V5.1, backup files from the public BETA will work on the final V5.1 too. ASL V5.1 does not need a new license or a special license. This ASL V5 ISO image includes all recently released Up2Date packages. For documentation, please see the documentation section of the Astaro web site: docs.astaro.org
For pricing information please contact:

Europe:  sales@astaro.com
Americas: salesus@astaro.com
Asia Pacific: sales@astaro.com

Related documents:

Hardware compatibility list
Known issue list
Manual (English Deutsch)
Knowledge Base
Support Information

Hardware Requirements
(Hardware Calculator):

CPU: PII > 400MHz
RAM: 128 MB (256 recommended)
CDROM: IDE or SCSI (see HCL for supported SCSI controller)
Harddisk: > 5GB IDE or SCSI (see HCL for supported SCSI controller)
NIC: at least 2 PCI NICs (see HCL for support chipsets)

Licensing
Use MyAstaro for Downloads and Licenses. Astaro downloads and licenses will now be handled through the new MyAstaro web site (https://my.astaro.com), which is replacing the Astaro Registration Portal.
You can get to MyAstaro three ways:

Go directly to https://my.astaro.com
From the Astaro web site (www.Astaro.com or www.Astaro.de) click the link in the upper left of that says "Log in" or the tab in the upper right corner that says "MyAstaro"
Click on any link on the Astaro Registration Portal

If you want an evaluation copy of Astaro Security Linux V5, go to MyAstaro and complete a short form to create a MyAstaro account. You will then be taken to a screen where you can request a V5 evaluation license and then download a free evaluation version of Astaro Security Linux.
Up2Date 5.100
Remarks

Required previous version is 5.027
SMTP configuration will be converted, please check
!! Firewall will reboot after Up2Date !!

New/Changed/Improved

Added new SMTP Proxy features (Greylisting, SPF, BATV)
Improved Spam Protection
Added SNMP trap support
Added bandwidth monitoring support

Bugfix
(please refer to the known issue list on http://docs.astaro.org)
ID1229 Peaks in network graphs after reboot
ID1433 HA linkbeat check does not support Intel and gigabit NICs
ID1468 SysKonnect NICs not supported by kernel
ID1538 Backupconverter does not set IPSec Auto-Packetfilters correctly
ID1551 HA Takeover event will not appear in reporting
Download Information
Urgency: Middle(low, Middle, HIGH)
Size:54MB (54,693,631 bytes)
md5sum: 426c681197aae0ea923798281ad18b29
All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Linux to the latest version. There are three ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and start a "Update now" in "System Up2Date. An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date process and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and enable "Prefetch Up2dates". The System Administrator will receive a Notification email after an Up2Date package has been succesfully fetched and can install the Up2Date by clicking "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server:
HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro Germany – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro Germany – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service", start "Import from file" and import the downloaded Up2Date package. After a successful upload click "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
