Up2Date 7.506 Released

We are releasing ASG Up2Date 7.506. The primary purpose of this release is to prepare V7 installations for the launch of our new Wireless Security solution.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

July 13, 2010

Network up2date

We are releasing ASG Up2Date 7.506. The primary purpose of this release is to prepare V7 installations for the launch of our new Wireless Security solution.

As well, the ASG installations will receive some updated files for support of the next point-release of Astaro Command Center V2.2. We also take the opportunity to fix a few small bugs.
This will be pushed out via our Up2Date infrastructure, however if you would just like to manually download it you can do so here. Otherwise read on for the details.
This version is focused around introducing the necessary options and menu items for our new Wireless Security solution. There is a new WebAdmin section called "Wireless Security" which contains an overview and controls. More details on the public wireless beta and the products themselves will be made available shortly. Changes and updates were made to the Astaro Command Center agent as well to prepare it for the upcoming GA release of ACC V2.2.
Official Details
Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.506.tgz.gpg
Size: 132.9MB (139,362,483 bytes)
Md5 : 614a8436398437c64cb7900c3b23601b
Remarks:

Configuration will be upgraded
System will be rebooted

*BETA Testers: Your connected access points will perform a firmware upgrade after 7.506 installs on the ASG. As with most firmware "flashing" operations, please do NOT power off your Access Point(s) while the LED’s are blinking furiously during their patching process, or you might be left with a non-working unit!
News:

Added Wireless Security support and WebAdmin area in preparation for upcoming public Beta phase (stay tuned!)
Added support for upcoming ACC 2.2 release
Added support for updated/renamed "Astaro IPsec Client"
Improved Online help for ASG

Fixes:
Fix [12668]: FTP directory listing over HTTP Proxy may not work correctly
Fix [14025]: Site-to-Site SSL Server fails to add routes when bounced quickly
For the ASG 7.5 Release Notes click here.
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version.  There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:
1) Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
2) Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:
Astaro AxG Up2Date Download Mirrors:

Astaro US
Astaro US2
Astaro Germany
Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.506] Astaro AP 30 Question").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server: http://demo.astaro.com (All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!)

Regards,
The Astaro Product Management Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
