Astaro Command Center V3.002 Released

Today we have released a maintenance Up2Date for Astaro Command Center. This release will increase the stability of your installation by addressing a few reported bugs, most notably the World-Map overview not operating correctly due to a change at Yahoo with their maps interface. Full details are available inside after the break.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

February 17, 2012

Network up2date

Today we have released a maintenance Up2Date for Astaro Command Center. This release will increase the stability of your installation by addressing a few reported bugs, most notably the World-Map overview not operating correctly due to a change at Yahoo with their maps interface. Full details are available inside after the break.

ACC Up2Date V3.002 Information
News
-This is a maintenance release
Remarks:
-System will be rebooted
-Configuration will be upgraded
Fixes:
-[20087] ACC loses Confd connection after session timeout
-[20107] Worldmap does not work due to old mapstraction version
-[20108] Fix library dependencies after apl update (Reporting now uses GD.pm)
Download link:
http://ftp.astaro.de/ACC/v3/up2date/u2d-sys-3.002.tgz.gpg
MD5: 26005022fe45c5b0e6c8a280e77eaf98
Size: ~23MB
**Important Licensing Note**: ACC Version 3 now uses our the newer-style licensing model we released in 2010 for our ASG products. While ACC remains totally free, this means your existing V2 ACC key from the MyAstaro.com portal is longer valid, nor is any outstanding static keys from the time when we only offered a single key for all installations. To get your new ACC 3.0 key, fill out the creation form on our website. Your personalized license will then be available via the License Management section of your MyAstaro account.

Astaro Command Center FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ACC V3 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[3.002] Central Backup Creation Question").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.
There is also an ACC demo server for public use: http://demo.astaro.com

Angelo Comazzetto

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
