A Week in Security (Apr 05 – 11)
Last week, we shared with our readers another great news about the company: Malwarebytes partnered up with the Online Trust Alliance (OTA) in an effort to make the Internet a safer place for our users with focus on security and privacy and identity protection. We made this move alongside other cybersecurity companies like Disconnect, ThreatWave, and Gap, Inc.
Screenshot hosting sites have become popular and part of this generation’s means of sharing. Our security experts found a site purporting to be of this kind, claiming to host a normal JPEG file. However, said file is actually an SCR (Windows screensaver), a file type that can be treated as a standalone EXE (executable) file like most malware are.
Our researchers discovered that a highly popular news site in Croatia called “Slobodna Dalmacija” was compromised to serve a variant of the Nuclear exploit kit.
Notable news stories and security related happenings:

Healthcare Is Ignoring Cyber Risk Intel, Academia Even Worse. “Healthcare and other sectors are indolently ignoring the process of gathering and using high-level intelligence to focus cyber defenses. Here’s proof.” (Source: Dark Reading)
How Exposing More Digital Flaws Could Actually Be Harming Security. “Jeff Schmidt, whose firm discovered a widespread Microsoft bug, worries that businesses are suffering from vulnerability fatigue. As a result, he says, they aren’t doing enough to protect themselves from digital assaults.” (Source: Christian Science Monitor)
Expired Google Certificate Temporarily Disrupts Gmail Service. “The problem was fixed in a matter of hours, but should serve as a reminder to online service operators that keeping track of digital certificate expiration dates is important and should be planned for in advance.” (Source: CSO Online)
No Shortcut to Ensuring World-class Online Security in Asia-Pacific. “The complexity of cybercrime is compounded as the issues as well as laws meant to prevent them vary greatly by country – individual hackers pose the greatest threat in China, while virtual identity theft and distributed denial-of-service attacks are more common in India. Furthermore, fighting cybercrime across borders is problematic when there is no unified and established global approach and legislation to combat this matter.” (Source: Enterprise Innovation)
Voice of the Consumer: Scam Using the Verizon Wireless Name. “Some crooks are very clever people. If only they would use their crafty ways legitimately, they’d be very wealthy and not have to worry about being hauled off to jail.” (Source: The Gazette)
As Many as 1 Million Sites Imperiled by Dangerous Bug in WordPress Plugin. “The bug lies in the way WP-Super-Cache displays information stored in the cache file key. In vulnerable versions, user-supplied data was appended to the page contents without being scrubbed clean of any potentially malicious commands.” (Source: Ars Technica)
Cybercrime Gets Easier, Attribution Gets Harder. “Threat actors are gaining capabilities through the adoption of cutting-edge tools instead of technical expertise, according to Websense. Redirect chains, code recycling and a host of other techniques are allowing these actors to remain anonymous, making attribution time consuming, difficult and ultimately unreliable.” (Source: Help Net Security)

Safe surfing, everyone!
The Malwarebytes Labs Team
