Up2Date 6.834 for ASG V7 BETA

This is this second Up2Date for ASG V7 BETA. It is again very huge, because we include a new kernel, bug fixes and missing features, like the eDirectory Browser or the Packet Filter Livelog with rule number display:  Please check out the Up2Date details:

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

November 16, 2006

Network up2date

This is this second Up2Date for ASG V7 BETA. It is again very huge, because we include a new kernel, bug fixes and missing features, like the eDirectory Browser or the Packet Filter Livelog with rule number display:

Please check out the Up2Date details:

Basics
First of all: thx for your feedback, suggestions, comments, feature requests, bug reports! We got continuously feedback on the UBB and v7@astaro.com and we appreciate everyone’s!
Also:

there is an online Firmware Up2Date and a new ISO image (save your backup first!)
the configuration will not be changed
the device will reboot!
Firmware Up2Date 6.834 is over 100MB big, please be patient with the download

Please remember: its still an BETA version of ASG V7. ASG V7 BETA will not be supported via Astaro’s support teams therefore you should not use it within productive environments!
Details
This is a brief overview about the components we updated:

Kernel: updated Marvel NIC driver, cluster bug fixes
User Portal: bug fixes and beautifying
POP3 bug fixes
Up2Date performance improve
Packet Filter Livelog with Rule Number display: (the yellow lines are rejected packets because of rule number 1)

Single Sign On with eDirectory (and a big performance boost compared to ASG V6)
Authentication overall bug fixes (NTLM-authentication is still buggy we afraid)
eDirectory Browser (First screenshot of an populated V7BETA eDir-browser in our v7 mailbox v7beta@astaro.com will win a V7 100 user 1 year everything enabled license, I will post this screenshot as a comment here :-)
new exception handling for all proxies and IPS
reporting improvements
and several hundred other improvements, bug fixes, changes, adds.

We working on the following features, which also will be included within the final ASG V7 version:

Initial Setup Wizard
Overall Reporting / Executive Report redesign/ Status Displaying
Performance optimization depending on RAM/CPU/Disk (already started with this Up2Date)
QoS/Packetfilter beautification
full ACC support
NTLM Single Sign On

License
Please check the 6.819 announcement for license details.

Download Information
ISO image asg-6.834-061116-2.iso
size: 384 MB (384,421,888  Byte)
md5sum: d57c101dbfc945bc112780a78f2f1263
FTP server:  * Germany * US * US 2 * Austria Mirror * Japanese Mirror
HTTP server:  * Germany * US * US 2 * Austria Mirror * Japanese Mirror
BitTorrent: * http://download.astaro.de/ASL/v7.0/iso_i386/asg-6.834-061116-2.iso.torrent
(If you are not familiar with BitTorrent, please check out this detailed description: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bittorrent). Search for "how to burn" on our Knowledge Base if you have trouble to burn a CD from the ISO image.
Feedback
If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V7 BETA features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board in the "BETA Version" forum. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[6.834] Cluster performance with 6 devices scales only 5.2 times"). Alternatively if you want to provide feedback, problem reports and comments directly to the Astaro R&D team you can also send it to V7Beta@astaro.com. If you have feedback to our documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com. We greatly appreciate your input, comments and suggestions – especially for this Up2Date!
There is also a demo server to check the new GUI: https://v7demo.astaro.com
Thx in advance for your tests!
Your Astaro R&D team
Here is the winner screenshot from Sven (see the comment below):

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
