ASG Up2Date 5.210 released [low]

This small Up2Date improves the SessionID security check for live log scripts in the WebAdmin and updates also the device agent for the upcoming Astaro Command Center (ACC).

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

February 09, 2006

Network up2date

This small Up2Date improves the SessionID security check for live log scripts in the WebAdmin and updates also the device agent for the upcoming Astaro Command Center (ACC).

Urgency: low (low, Middle, HIGH)
Size: 8M (8,959,688  bytes)
md5sum: ee78f15d1d3f4688814c3d2b9e5a1192
Up2Date 5.210
Remarks

Required previous version is 5.209
Existing configuration will not be changed
Middleware will be restarted
Active IP and VPN connections will be restarted
Depending on the speed of the CPU the Up2Date installation will take a few minutes

New/Changed/Improved

Improved SessionID security for live log scripts
Improved ACC device agent

Bugfix
(please refer to the known issue list on http://www.astaro.com/kb)
ID3484 IPSec Client config includes wrong lifetimes
Download Information
All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Linux to the latest version. There are three ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and start a "Update now" in "System Up2Date. An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date process and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and enable "Prefetch Up2dates". The System Administrator will receive a Notification email after an Up2Date package has been succesfully fetched and can install the Up2Date by clicking "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server:
HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro Germany – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro Germany – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service", start "Import from file" and import the downloaded Up2Date package. After a successful upload click "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.

To install Astaro Security Linux, you need the installation ISO image, available on our download page.
Minimum Hardware Requirements

CPU: PII > 400MHz
RAM: 128 MB (256 recommended)
CDROM: IDE or SCSI (see HCL for supported SCSI controller)
Harddisk: > 5GB IDE or SCSI (see HCL for supported SCSI controller)
NIC: at least 2 PCI NICs (see HCL for support chipsets)

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
