SEP 12.1 Released

Posted by Roger on 11 July 2011, 11:08 pm

Symantec Endpoint Protection 12.1 was released on July 5th.   A post on Symantec Connect says they are deploying the upgrade licenses via snail mail and sending in alphabetical order.   To a certain extent, I can sympathize with a desire to not overwhelm support.   But I feel that people who participated in the beta program should be given access to the bits immediately.
I logged into https://licensing.symantec .com and selected Version Upgrade.  Next I selected “I Don’t Have an Upgrade ID”.   Select your customer number and select upgrade on the following screen.   If none of the one’s listed give you a SEP upgrade you’ll need to find your license pdf and use the customer number associated with the purchase of SEP.
I then had a valid serial number to use at https://fileconnect.symantec.com.   After downloading the bits, I found that unfortunately SEP 12.1 is requiring me to use a license file.   I figured this might be coming.   in SEP11, Symantec required small business to use license files.   I haven’t had to use a license file since we started using Symantec Antivirus more than 10 years ago.   I feel like this is only an unnecessary complication.
Next I began working on an upgrade plan.   I currently am running SEPM on a Windows 2003 server.   This seems like a good time to change that to Windows 2008 R2.   One method would be to bring up a second server with Windows 2008 R2 and SEPM 12.1.   I prefer to keep my computers reporting to a server with the same name and IP.   That means I’ll be using a disaster recovery scenario.
The first issue I’m finding is a lack of documentation for recovering SEP11 recovery files into a SEP12 server.  I’m thinking I may be better off upgrading the existing server to SEP 12.1 and performing a DR backup, then turn the server off and bring up the Windows 2008R2.    Another possibility is to put SEP11 on the Windows 2008R2 server and then upgrade it to SEP12.   I prefer to keep the new server “cleaner” than that.
I would think this would be a relatively common scenario.   But all I can find is the linked Symantec knowledge base article that states SEP11 DR files can’t be imported into the standard SEP12 DR files.   I understand that.  But I would still think it could be done manually.
I’ll be trying to get some more answers before doing the upgrade, even in the test environment.
