Up2Date 7.510 Released

The main reason for this release is to make our "One-Touch Update to V8 for Appliances" available to all valid remaining ASG installations; notably those with Wireless Security enabled via Full Guard licensing and Stand-Alone licenses. Cluster and HA environments using ASG appliances can also now use this feature. In addition, we will use the opportunity to issue a few fixes.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

March 07, 2011

Network up2date

The main reason for this release is to make our "One-Touch Update to V8 for Appliances" available to all valid remaining ASG installations; notably those with Wireless Security enabled via Full Guard licensing and Stand-Alone licenses. Cluster and HA environments using ASG appliances can also now use this feature. In addition, we will use the opportunity to issue a few fixes.
As promised, we have updated the landing target of the appliance migration process; those making use of this one-touch operation will now land at ASG V8.102. More details are below.
UpDate 7.510 Details
Remarks:

Configuration will not be upgraded
System will be rebooted

News:

Enabled upgrade to V8 for Wireless and HA/Cluster systems

Fixes:

[14097] HTTPS scanning only applies for the first network in list
[14594] After update to v7.506, German online-help is not reachable any more
[16088] No entries in the Packetfilter Log (HA/Cluster Mode) during some situations

Download Information
Manual Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.510.tgz.gpg
Size: ~45 MB
MD5: 326a5c779dba1d83ef734470db61b30b
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your Astaro   Security Gateway to the latest version. There are two ways to apply an   Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date      >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the   Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window"   and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date   installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification   email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

Astaro ASG Up2Date Download Mirrors:

Astaro US
Astaro US2
Astaro Germany
Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[7.510] One-Touch Upgrade").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.

Regards,
Angelo Comazzetto
Astaro Product Manager

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
