ASG Up2Date 6.106 released [High]

This Up2Date renews just the license for the anti virus scan engine, but is simple necessary... So, please install the Up2Date immediately.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

March 21, 2006

Network up2date

This Up2Date renews just the license for the anti virus scan engine, but is simple necessary… So, please install the Up2Date immediately.

Urgency: HIGH (low, Middle, HIGH)
Size: 1 Mbyte (1,522,269 bytes)
md5sum: 0dfe0bb529eb2fd80189a62f1c48e565
Up2Date 6.106
Remarks

Required previous version is 6.105
Existing configuration will not be changed
Virus scan engine will be restartet
!! Install this Up2Date immediately, Virus Protection may stop working if not applied !

Bugfix
(please refer to the LIST OF KNOWN ISSUES on http://www.astaro.com/kb)
ID3659 Kaspersky license needs update
Download Information
All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Linux to the latest version. There are three ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and start a "Update now" in "System Up2Date. An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date process and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and enable "Prefetch Up2dates". The System Administrator will receive a Notification email after an Up2Date package has been succesfully fetched and can install the Up2Date by clicking "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server:
HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service", start "Import from file" and import the downloaded Up2Date package. After a successful upload click "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.

To install Astaro Security Gateway, you need the installation ISO image, available on our download page.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
