Up2date 7.503 Released

We are in the process of delivering Up2Date 7.503 to our installations. It will appear soon for installation via your WebAdmin. This is a small bugfix update which addresses an incompatibility when using the Web Security subscription with the new Astaro licensing model. It does not require a restart of the system. You can read on for more information and the manual download link.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

February 16, 2010

Network up2date

We are in the process of delivering Up2Date 7.503 to our installations. It will appear soon for installation via your WebAdmin. This is a small bugfix update which addresses an incompatibility when using the Web Security subscription with the new Astaro licensing model. It does not require a restart of the system. You can read on for more information and the manual download link.

Details:
Download Information
ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v7/up2date/u2d-sys-7.503.tgz.gpg
Md5sum: 1f2f158633edfb6a768958745c26acb3
Size: 5.12 Megabytes
Remarks

Configuration will not be upgraded
Middleware will be restarted
Existing connections will be reestablished

News

This package addresses a licensing issue only
For the new things in ASG 7.5 you can view the Release Notes here.

Bugfix
[ID12695] HTTP Proxy content filter does not work properly with new license model
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version.  There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:  Astaro AxG Up2Date Download Mirrors:
– Astaro US
– Astaro US2
– Astaro Germany
– Astaro Germany2
(All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!)

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the AxG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.502] Real Time Bandwidth Monitor ").
If you have feedback to our documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server to try: http://demo.astaro.com

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
