Blacklisted sites at Netsol

In the last few days many sites hosted at Network Solution got blacklisted by Google. In all of them the report from Google was:
URL:  sitename
Last checked: June 2, 2010
General problem
When Google last tested this page, no content was returned from your server.
Instead, the browser was redirected to a malicious web page. It is likely
that your server configuration has been modified.
On the ones that we manually checked, the sites were clean and malware-free (no redirection). They were all hosted at the IP address 205.178.145.65, and it looks like that their other servers didn’t get affected.
What happened? It seems that either that server got compromised affecting all sites on it or a bug on Google’s malware checker.
If your site got blacklisted and it says on the warning page something along these lines: (and you are hosting at that IP address)

What is the current listing status for xx.com?
Site is listed as suspicious – visiting this web site may harm your computer.
Part of this site was listed for suspicious activity 1 time(s) over the past 90 days.
What happened when Google visited this site?
Of the X pages we tested on the site over the past 90 days, 6 page(s) resulted in malicious software being downloaded and installed without user consent. The last time Google visited this site was on 2010-06-02, and the last time suspicious content was found on this site was on 2010-06-02..
Malicious software is hosted on 1 domain(s), including 92.63.111.0/.
This site was hosted on 1 network(s) including AS6245 (NETWORK).
You can submit a review request on Google and it will be removed from their blacklist. Note that it only applies when the warning says “Malicious software is hosted on 1 domain(s), including 92.63.111.0”.
If there was a problem, they fixed already. If you don’t know how to submit a malware review request on Google, this link explains how to do so:
Malware Removal
Update: According to Google, around 4k sites are currently blacklisted.
*If anyone has more information, please share in the comments below.
