Celine Dion’s Official Site Used as Spam Launchpad
Fans of Canadian singer, Celine Dion, who frequent her website may find something odd today.
The celebrity, who was once rumoured to be a potential bidder for ownership of the Montreal Canadiens NHL team, ran afoul of some hockey-related spam, as shown below:

click to enlarge
Partial text below:
///Fox Tv//Czech Republic vs Austria Live Stream Hockey World Championship Online

Watch Czech Republic vs Austria Wild live lead series 2015, TODAY Watch Canadiens vs. Senators Live Online Video Streaming, NHL playoffs 2015: Time, TV schedule and how to watch Game 3 online, Watch Czech Republic vs Austria Wild Stream Stanley Cup Playoffs Live Free Sports Live Streaming - Channel 1.Watch Czech Republic vs Austria Wild Stream Stanley Cup Playoffs Live - Free Sports Live Streaming - Channel 1.You can follow Game 2 with CBC Ottawa as Dan Séguin and Stu Mills live-tweet from inside and outside the Bell Centre in Montreal.Ottawa Senators Curtis Lazar gets hilt by Montreal Canadiens Alexi Emelin during first period action at the Bell .... LIVE: Ottawa Senator
If you’re an avid reader of Malwarebytes Unpacked, you may have noticed that this is similar to the spam posts on Steam we’ve documented not so long ago.
It may appear like the site has been compromised as the spam post is on the celebrity’s Photo gallery; however, the issue is with a plugin that allows registered users in the site to upload fan photos. While this is probably intentional, the admins may not have foreseen the problem of spam images coming with clickable text.

click to enlarge
Going back, visitors who click the spam link are directed to a domain that asks for personal information and payment details, just like all the “free streaming” sites we’ve seen so far. Often in these situations, people do not get what they paid for, so we advise caution.
This slideshow requires JavaScript.
We have already reached out to the admin of Celine Dion’s website regarding this.
Other related post(s):

Have Scammers Caught Up with Super 15, Too?
Gaming Site is New Home to Spammed Free Movie Links
Scammers Spam Steam’s Artwork Gallery

Jovi Umawing (Thanks to Steven for the assist)
