ASG 8.306 Up2Date Released & UTM 9 Appliance One-Touch Upgrade News

With this GA release of ASG 8.306, in addition to dozens of bugfixes we have also put in place the needed mechanics for valid hardware appliances to perform a one-touch upgrade from Astaro Security Gateway to Sophos UTM 9. However, upgrading will happen at staged intervals. For all the information about changes and fixes in ASG 8.306 and the one-touch UTM 9 appliance migration process, read on for details!

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

September 20, 2012

Network up2date

With this GA release of ASG 8.306, in addition to dozens of bugfixes we have also put in place the needed mechanics for valid hardware appliances to perform a one-touch upgrade from Astaro Security Gateway to Sophos UTM 9. However, upgrading will happen at staged intervals. For all the information about changes and fixes in ASG 8.306 and the one-touch UTM 9 appliance migration process, read on for details!

This release places the necessary code in your system for the one-touch appliance migration, but with our amount of installations skyrocketing we have decided to roll out this process based on appliance model. Beginning with the ASG/UTM 220/320 models in approximately two weeks time, we will enable our various appliance models to perform a one-touch migration to UTM 9 by releasing special updates over the pattern channel which unlocks the operation in the Up2Date section of your WebAdmin. In addition to ongoing announcements within the news feed of WebAdmin itself, I will post updates regularly in this forums thread, which also outlines some more details around the migration. Note that we have decided to drop support for very old appliance models, and are offering a trade-up program to interested customers. The forums thread also has more information on that.
If you have any questions on the migration, ask them there. For other users not concerned with upgrading to UTM 9 just yet, the below fixes make your ASG V8 more stable and happy. Here are the details:
Astaro Security Gateway 8.306 Up2Date Information
News:

Added support for UTM 9 Upgrade (for supported appliance models)
IPS engine update
Performance improvement for AD SSO on very busy systems
Various fixes for Search Engine Reporting
Various fixes for IPSec VPN

Remarks:

System will be rebooted
Configuration will be upgraded

Bugfixes:

[17437] Traffic counting in Flash-based reports is incorrect

[18993] Application Control Rules don’t work for HTTPS traffic through HTTP Proxy

[19021] internal IPs used as static RAS-IPs are detected as IP-Spoofing

[19458] MIME type check: Pattern for DOS COM executables matches some russian texts

[19484] Block page for invalid/untrusted SSL certificate is not displayed when any exception matches

[20200] FTP-Download through HTTP-Proxy with “@” in filename causes timeout

[20662] IPsec S2S connection can’t establish after DSL Reconnect

[20932] If an AppControl profile exists that matches the request source address, all following AppControl profiles’s source match top

Download:
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/ASG/v8/up2date/u2d-sys-8.306.tgz.gpg
Size: ~102MB
MD5: 96c65ba4d6251f3a4cdeabbcda07a195
Up2Date Installation:
Sophos Up2Date technology makes it easy to update your Astaro Security Gateway. There are two ways to apply an already-downloaded Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the “Watch Up2Date Progress in new window” and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

ASG Up2Date FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG or UTM features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. “[9.002] Configuring wireless guest access using hotspots”).
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.
There are also UTM 9 demo server environments for public use.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
