Astaro Command Center 2.2 Public Beta Begins

We would like to invite you to the Public Beta for our next point-release of the Astaro Command Center, Version 2.2. Our developers have been hard at work building and refining new features for our centralized management product, and there are some very powerful new things to see and test.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

May 31, 2010

Network up2date

We would like to invite you to the Public Beta for our next point-release of the Astaro Command Center, Version 2.2. Our developers have been hard at work building and refining new features for our centralized management product, and there are some very powerful new things to see and test.

Astaro Command Center 2.2 will remain a completely free product, and is available as a software appliance ISO which you download and install on the hardware of your choice or run inside a VMware virtual machine (or other virtual solution). From there, you quickly configure your Astaro Security Gateway(s) to communicate with ACC and you then get the ability to configure, get overview information, and generate reports for all connected devices, to name just a few things. This leaves you with a sort of "Throne-Room" for your ASG installations.
This version introduces some great new abilities like Global Packet Filter configuration, central configuration of Web Security profiles, and automatic deployment of Global Objects. Read on for all the details.
IMPORTANT NOTE on Compatibility:
In ACC 2.2, a new device agent is required to use the NEW features being introduced. This agent needs ASG V8 (currently in public Beta) V7.920 which is planned for June 1st. For V7 users, the new agent will be added in version 7.506 which should be released in mid to late June.
ACC 2.2 is however fully backwards compatible with ASG V7.5+, only the NEW features require this updated agent. So for full use of the ACC 2.2 Beta and all it’s features, you need either V8 Beta 7.920+ or V7.506+. As with our past community-oriented Beta programs, all comments and discussions around the ACC 2.2 Beta are located can be found here in our Beta forum dedicated to ACC 2.2. There you will find further information on this release, along with details on the Beta contest.
Official Details
Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ACC/v2/beta/acc-2.150-100531-3.iso
Size: 569M (596305920 bytes)
MD5: 8ecec0fc5d7680a41332e616f76eb0f2
Remarks

Install Beta ISO and restore your ACC backup to it.
You will be able to Up2Date from the Beta to the GA release of ACC 2.2

News

New Feature: Central Web Security Configuration (Including Filter Actions, URL Categories, Exceptions and Proxy Auto-Configuration)
New Feature: Central Packet-Filter Configuration
New Feature: Auto-Deployment of global definitions based on Organizational Unit
New Feature: Added new global definition types
(Time events & IPsec policies)
Selectable merge granularity when capturing local definitions during deployment of global ones
IPSec configuration can now re-use global network definitions and global/custom IPsec policies
Expired license subscriptions will gradually loose impact on monitoring level
Bug fixes and many other small improvements

But wait, there’s more! During the Beta, additional features will be introduced. Added will be the ability to add a second ACC server connection, place some restrictions on the areas of ASG which ACC is allowed to interact with, and Single Sign On real name pass-through.
Enjoy testing this new release, there is a lot to see and use. Remember if you have any questions, or would like to know more about the Beta program for ACC 2.2, please visit our the ACC 2.2 Beta Forum.
Happy testing everyone,
Angelo Comazzetto
Product Manager

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
