ASG V7 GA released !

Astaro is pleased to announce the availability of the Astaro Security Gateway V7 GA. Version 7 contains a huge number of advanced features and enhancements like transparent e-mail encryption, SSL VPN, active/active clustering and control of instant messaging and peer-to-peer file sharing traffic.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

January 22, 2007

Network up2date

Astaro is pleased to announce the availability of the Astaro Security Gateway V7 GA.   Version 7 contains a huge number of advanced features and enhancements like transparent e-mail encryption, SSL VPN, active/active clustering and control of instant messaging and peer-to-peer file sharing traffic.

Thanks to anybody who contributed to this major release! We received a tremendous amount of excellent feedback during our BETA test.
Key features of this latest release include:

Enhanced GUI & Usability Improvements
End User Portal
Customizable end user messages
Configurable Alerting
Improved Reporting
Improved Packet Filter Logging
Active/Active High Availability (Cluster)
VoIP optimized QoS support
Zero Latency HA
Auto Configuration HA
Ethernet Link Aggregation
SSL VPN
Dynamic OSPF Routing
Improved VoIP security
DNS Enhancements
TACACS  authentication support
VPN configuration for network groups
Configurable DSL reconnect
End User Spam Report
POP3 pre-fetching
Foreign Charsets support for SMTP and POP3
Customizable Email Footer
OpenPGP & S/MIME Email encryption / decryption
Transparent FTP Proxy
Instant Messaging and Peer-to-Peer Management
Improved HTTP Proxy Performance

A detailed description of the new features, changes, system requirements as well as installation and upgrade information is included within the    Astaro Security Gateway V7 Release Notes.   The Astaro Security Gateway Administration Guide, a hardware compatibility list and a Known Issues List for the GA release are available on our knowledge base.   The import of ASG V6 configuration backup files is not supported within the initial 7.000 release but will be made available through a future Up2Date package.
License
ASG V7 includes a 30 day all feature on trial period period.   Please check the Release Note for details.
Download Information
ISO image asg-7.000-070123-1.iso
size: 412 MB (412,338,176 Byte)
md5sum: d544437371accd3920abe23fc4720d93
FTP server: Germany  – Germany2  – US  – US 2  – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
HTTP server:  Germany  – Germany2  – US  – US 2  – Austria Mirror  – Japanese Mirror
BitTorrent: http://download.astaro.de/ASL/v7.0/iso_i386/asg-7.000-070123-1.iso.torrent
(If you are not familiar with BitTorrent, please check out this detailed description: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bittorrent).   Search for "how to burn" on our Knowledge Base if you have trouble to burn a CD from the ISO image.
Feedback
If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.000] VPN setup question (V6-V7)").   If you have feedback to our documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.   There is also a demo server to check the new GUI: http://demo.astaro.com
Your Astaro R&D team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
