Forcepoint Cloud Security reaches “FedRAMP In Process” Phase

In a cloud-first world, advances in technology constantly change how we communicate and have given organizations increased flexibility and rapid collaboration capabilities. In order to reap these benefits, organizations must streamline security with an intelligent, cloud-first solution that protects in real-time and that will enable long term missions and protect critical infrastructure.
Today, Forcepoint has announced it’s taken a significant next step in offering our US federal government customers peace of mind when it comes to their cloud cybersecurity strategy by reaching the “FedRAMP In Process” phase with the sponsorship of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
Forcepoint Web Security Cloud and Forcepoint Email Security Cloud are demonstrating FedRAMP Compliance through evidence, documents and engineering processes delivered in the security package delivered to the FedRAMP Project Management Office (PMO) on June 12, 2017.
Forcepoint Web Security Cloud provides industry-leading reporting, sandboxing and DLP capabilities, and advanced, non-signature threats to business critical data. Forcepoint Web Security Cloud is built on a unified platform that enables Forcepoint products to work together, and protects data everywhere – in the cloud, on the road and in the office – simplifying compliance and enabling better decision-making and more efficient security.
Forcepoint Email Security Cloud protects against multi-stage advanced threats that often exploit email to penetrate IT defenses. It applies thousands of real time threat analytics, behavioral sandboxing and other advanced defense technologies to identify targeted attacks.
About FedRAMP
The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program, or FedRAMP, is a U.S. government-wide program that provides a standardized approach to security assessment, authorization and continuous monitoring for cloud products and services. FedRAMP is the result of close collaboration with cybersecurity and cloud experts from the General Services Administration (GSA), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Defense (DOD), National Security Agency (NSA), Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO) Council and its working groups, as well as private industry.
Products go through three phases during the FedRAMP authorization process.
Phase 1: The process starts with a Readiness Assessment of a company’s operational system. This is done through completing a Readiness Assessment Report. After completing the Readiness Assessment the system will be designated “FedRAMP Ready.” Forcepoint’s Cloud Security products have been FedRAMP Ready since 2016.
Phase 2: The next step in the FedRAMP process is the development of a complete security package for review.  Cloud systems are designated as “FedRAMP In Process” upon completion and delivery of the security package to the JAB.
Phase 3: The final step is the JAB Authorization Review Process. In this phase the FedRAMP PMO will conduct a thorough review of the complete security package. The JAB will then make a recommendation to grant a company FedRAMP authorization. At this point the system will be designated at “FedRAMP Authorized,” which takes about another 4 to 6 months.
For more information regarding the FedRAMP process please visit the FedRAMP website: www.fedramp.gov
Forcepoint is now listed in the FedRAMP Marketplace in the “FedRAMP In Process” section of the FedRAMP.gov website at https://marketplace.fedramp.gov/#/product/forcepoint-cloud-security?status=In%20Process&sort=productName
More Links

Forcepoint Cloud Security product information https://www.forcepoint.com/cloud
Overview of the FedRAMP Program -- https://www.forcepoint.com/cyber-edu/fedramp
