A week in security (April 16 – April 22)
Last week, we took a stroll down memory lane talking about Facebook and MySpace, noticed a change in the Magnitude exploit kit—wherein it started adopting the GandCrab ransomware, took a good look at a new form of adware that is based on Python, chatted a bit about Russian hacking with a journalist, encouraged retailers to ask the right questions to protect their business, and weighed in on a way to speed up Internet bandwidth and increase privacy via Cloudflare’s new DNS service.
Other news

Cryptocurrency is all the rave these days—and so are cryptominers. Security researchers recently discovered one that doesn’t rely on an open browser session. (Source: HackRead)
Tax fraud is no longer for the clueless, it seems. Experts noticed that scammers are also targeting tax professionals—those filing taxes on behalf of their clients. (Source: CNBC)
To date, adware, spyware, and malware have lurked inside the Google Play Store. But surveillanceware? That’s definitely something new. (Source: Lookout Blog)
At the recently concluded RSA conference, tech companies like Microsoft and Facebook joined together to sign a pledge to protect users and refrain from helping any government launch a cyberattack. (Source: ZDNet)
While the usage of Adobe Flash has significantly decreased, this doesn’t mean that the threats exploiting them have declined. So remain vigilant! (Source: McAfee’s Securing Tomorrow Blog)
Gmail’s new “Confidential Mode” is not entirely private after all. SIGH. (Source: Sophos’s Naked Security Blog)
Security researchers noticed an increased activity of APT groups based in Asia and the Middle East. (Source: SC Magazine)
Here’s a new word to keep in mind: trustjacking. And iPhone users are particularly at risk of this one. (Source: Wired)
Stresspaint, a new information stealer, is a type of malware that is after Chrome login data, session cookies, and appears to be particularly interested in Facebook details. (Source: Bleeping Computer)
A ransomware variant appeared to be repurposed to infect files, mine for cryptocurrency…and destroy affected users’ files. Good grief! (Source: ZDNet)

Stay safe, everyone!
