Public ASG V7.300 BETA released

New Astaro Security Gateway V7.300 BETA improves Mail Security and Management functionality

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

July 03, 2008

Network up2date

New Astaro Security Gateway V7.300 BETA improves Mail Security and Management functionality

Astaro invites you to participate in the ASG V7.300 Beta Test Program. The new release features  a broad set of new and improved Mail Security functions, redesigned End-User and Mail Manager portals, enhanced authentication management and reporting functions, performance improvements for reporting and logging as well as bugfixes.
What’s new in ASG V7.300?
The following new features are included:
Improved Email Filter

Sender/domain and IP/network blacklists (SMTP only)
Spam and malware rejection during SMTP transaction
Email recipient verification based on Active Directory (SMTP only)
MIME type blocking with "magic" file type lookup (SMTP only)
Quarantine for unscannable attachments (e.g. encrypted zips, oversized content)
Upload and/or change SMTP TLS/SSL certificate
Upstream host/network list, with "Upstream hosts only" option
RDNS and HELO checks (anti-spam feature)
Multi-lingual spam digest with configurable schedule (two configurable times per day)
DKIM (Domainkeys Identified Mail) outgoing mail signing
Multi-lingual UserPortal with customizable welcome message
Persistent cookie support for end user portal
SMTP parent proxy support for spam detection engine
Reworked Email encryption engine (with additional support of PGP key server query and clustering)

Management

Redesigned End-User and Mail Manager portals (enhanced search, management of deferred messages and more)
Visual SMTP log (in Admin Mail Manager)
Redesigned SMTP Proxy Profile configuration
Configurable SMTP Server for Notifications
Test Authentication Settings and User Authentication
Reworked eDirectory Browser and new Active Directory Browser
Backend-User-Group Support for Authentication
Directory User Prefetch for eDirectory and Active Directory
Perfomance Improvements for Logging and Reporting (based on PostgreSQL)
Show Reporting Graphs of HA-/Cluster-Slave Machines in WebAdmin
Reboot/Halt HA-/Cluster-Slave Machines in WebAdmin
Configurable Reporting

Other

IPsec XAUTH support
Besides these new features the new release includes bugfixes and updates that increase the stability and system performance.

Known-Issues

Online help has not been updated for new or changed features yet.

How to become a Beta Tester
Bullet proof internet security is mission critical to all our customers. A comprehensive testing procedure is required to achieve the right level of perfection for Astaro products in a productive environment. Therefore we would like to invite you to participate in our Beta Test Program. The following sections will provide all the information you need to download, install and test the ASG V7.3 Beta.
Testing Period
July 3rd – August 15th
Download Information
The initial beta version can only be tested through a new installation, i.e. by downloading and installing the complete ISO image. You can’t upgrade your existing installation with a BETA up2date package. However, it is possible to restore a backup from an earlier version (up to 7.201).
New installation:
Download ISO-Image for custom X86 hardware
(Size 450177024 bytes, MD5Sum c83107fe6a21777c1a4af843422b86ed)
Download ISO-Image for ASG appliances
(Size 473632768 bytes, MD5Sum 83b2e6d714d380579f95c3ac36fb2a1a)
Limitations and Hints

ASG V7.3 BETA will not be supported via Astaro’s support teams, using it in production evironments is therefore discouraged.
A ASG V7.3 manual and complete Online Help will be available with the GA release.

Test Cases
After you have successfully installed the beta version of ASG V7.3 you are able to conduct individual tests at your own discretion. If feasible we would also appreciate if you would have a closer look into the following areas and provide us with your personal feedback as described below:

End-User portal / Admin Mail Manager
SMTP Proxy in general
POP3 Proxy
FTP Proxy

Feedback
As with earlier versions please post any feedback and discuss any of the ASG V7.3 BETA features on our User Bulletin Board in the "BETA Version" forum.
Win Amazon Gift cards!
Your feedback is important. It supports our effort to meet the highest quality demands. As a result, participants in our Beta Program for ASG V7.3 will have the chance to win three Amazon Gift Cards! Please see the BETA version forum on our User Bulletin Board for details.
Your Astaro Product Management Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
