ASG Up2Date 6.105 released [Middle]

This Up2Date prepares ASG for the upcoming Common Criteria and ICSA certification. It also adds Japanese language support in the WebAdmin and includes some improvements and (of course) bugfixes. Please check the details inside...

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

February 28, 2006

Network up2date

This Up2Date prepares ASG for the upcoming  Common Criteria and ICSA certification. It also adds Japanese language support in the WebAdmin and includes some improvements and (of course) bugfixes. Please check the details inside…

Urgency: Middle (low, Middle, HIGH)
Size: 80 Mbyte (80,586,159   bytes)
md5sum: b5991ab8c169e214b1f99f13407cbaea
Up2Date 6.105
Remarks

Required previous version is 6.104
Existing configuration will not be changed
WebAdmin LiveLog may stop updating during installation
!! Firewall will reboot after Up2Date !!

New/Changed/Improved

Added Common Criteria support in WebAdmin
Added ICSA support in WebAdmin
Added Japanese language support in WebAdmin
Improved SMTP Proxy queue handling
Improved HTTP Proxy download manager

Bugfix
(please refer to the LIST OF KNOWN ISSUES on http://www.astaro.com/kb)
ID2792 Automatic CRL Fetching not working
ID3167 Compression for Net-to-Net IPSec tunnels not working
ID3408 POP3 sender whitelist is case sensitive
ID3413 Dowload Manager delivers wrong sized files
ID3414 HA daemon not starting up correctly
ID3419 HA config sync may not work correctly
ID3485 ClamAV reports RAR files as Unknown Virus
ID3621 Deleting oldest logfiles via archive settings not working
Download Information
All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Linux to the latest version.
There are three ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and start a "Update now" in "System Up2Date. An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date process and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and enable "Prefetch Up2dates". The System Administrator will receive a Notification email after an Up2Date package has been succesfully fetched and can install the Up2Date by clicking "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server:
HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service", start "Import from file" and import the downloaded Up2Date package. After a successful upload click "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.

To install Astaro Security Gateway, you need the installation ISO image, available on our download page.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
