UTM 9.001 Up2Date Released

Following the GA release of UTM 9, we have our first Up2Date available today. This is a bugfix release designed to enhance the stability and performance of your installation. For ASG V8 appliance users - work is progressing on the next Up2Date for that platform which will enable the one-touch migration for elligible platforms. As a reminder, due to the random and expansive nature of hardware chosen by our software-platform users, we will only offer one-touch migration for our official appliances. Software users should re-install UTM 9 and restore a backup file to migrate. An entirely new (and very cool) demo platform for seeing and tinkering with UTM 9 is very close to launching. At that time the ASG V8 demo servers will be upgraded to UTM 9; the initial roll out of the new demo servers is targeted for later this week (or perhaps next week if needed). Read on for the extended details of UTM 9.001.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

August 09, 2012

Network up2date

Following the GA release of UTM 9, we have our first Up2Date available today. This is a bugfix release designed to enhance the stability and performance of your installation. For ASG V8 appliance users – work is progressing on the next Up2Date for that platform which will enable the one-touch migration for elligible platforms. As a reminder, due to the random and expansive nature of hardware chosen by our software-platform users, we will only offer one-touch migration for our official appliances. Software users should re-install UTM 9 and restore a backup file to migrate.
An entirely new (and very cool) demo platform for seeing and tinkering with UTM 9 is very close to launching. At that time the ASG V8 demo servers will be upgraded to UTM 9; the initial roll out of the new demo servers is targeted for later this week (or perhaps next week if needed). Read on for the extended details of UTM 9.001.

Sophos UTM 9.001 Up2Date Information
News:

Bug fix release

Remarks:

System will be rebooted
Configuration will be upgraded

Bugfixes:

[20442] Amazon VPC broken in V9
[21891] Upload of S/MIME certificates in PKCS#12 format doesn’t work
[21944] Requesting an unreachable IPv6 address leads to an endless loop in the http proxy
[21988] SSL VPN not working if username from AD backend contains special characters
[22004] ‘Edit dashboard settings’ is broken after importing an ASG V8 config

Download:
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/UTM/v9/up2date/u2d-sys-9.001018.tgz.gpg
Size: ~87MB
MD5: b7ea745afccf39156ef9837cd5510692
Up2Date Installation:
Sophos Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your Sophos UTM to the latest version. There are two ways to apply an already-downloaded Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:

Sophos UTM Up2Date FTP Mirrors:

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the UTM V9 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please indicate the version you are using (e.g. "[9.001] Configuring wireless guest access using hotspots").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to nsg-documentations@sophos.com.
There is also a demo server for public use: http://demo.astaro.com

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
