ASG Up2Date 6.200 released [Low]

This Up2Date adds some very interesting new functionality: Generic Proxy, eDirectory LDAP browser and an eDirectory Single Sign-On.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

March 22, 2006

Network up2date

This Up2Date adds some very interesting new functionality: Generic Proxy, eDirectory LDAP browser  and an eDirectory Single Sign-On.

Urgency: low (low, Middle, HIGH)
Size: 54 Mbyte (54,157,179 bytes)
md5sum: 5e9b47b72a41bc46a1aa79d6e6ff810b
Up2Date 6.200
Remarks

Required previous version is 6.106
Existing configuration will not be changed
Middleware will be restarted
Active IP and VPN connections will be restarted
Depending on the speed of the CPU the Up2Date installation will take a few minutes

New/Changed/Improved

Added eDirectory Single Sign-On
Added eDirectory LDAP browser
Added Generic Proxy

Bugfix
(please refer to the LIST OF KNOWN ISSUES on http://www.astaro.com/kb)
ID3402 Large harddrives cause squid errors
ID3649 Contentfilter categories may show empty fields after factory reset
Download Information
All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Linux to the latest version. There are three ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:

Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and start a "Update now" in "System Up2Date. An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date process and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service" and enable "Prefetch Up2dates". The System Administrator will receive a Notification email after an Up2Date package has been succesfully fetched and can install the Up2Date by clicking "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server:
HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Australian Mirror – Austria Mirror – Japanese Mirror
Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to "System -> Up2Date Service", start "Import from file" and import the downloaded Up2Date package. After a successful upload click "[install]" on the now available menu item "Unapplied Up2Dates". An extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System Administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.

To install Astaro Security Gateway, you need the installation ISO image, available on our download page.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
