New Malwarebytes Anti-Exploit Version Is Out!
We have just released Malwarebytes Anti-Exploit 1.07. This latest version brings in some new features, improvements and bug fixes.
Malwarebytes Anti-Exploit uses a combination of one enforcement layer and three protection layers to block attacks. In this version, we have added new mitigation techniques to stop threats earlier during the exploitation phase.
Last month, we documented how the top exploit kit (Angler EK) had given up on attempting to exploit users running our software.
However, we are not resting on our laurels and still test the exploit kit regardless.
In the example below, we are blocking Angler’s Internet Explorer exploit by stopping a malicious VBScript:

As more and more Office documents are using Macros to deliver malware – in particular the Dridex banking Trojan – we have also hardened our layer 3 protection which focuses on malicious behaviors (i.e. Microsoft Word wants to run an executable):

(Please note that only Malwarebytes Anti-Exploit Premium shields Office applications).
In addition to these new features, we have also improved existing ones and fixed bugs. You can download the new version directly from our website.
Here’s the full changelog:
New Features:
Added new Layer1 exploit mitigations for ROP detection
Added new Layer1 exploit mitigations for IE VB scripting
Added new Layer3 exploit mitigations for Powershell abuse
Added telemetry from Firefox & Chrome
Added ability to edit custom shields
Added ability to log protection events to UI
Added ability to auto-upgrade corporate builds
Added support for Windows 10
Added blacklisting of pirated and fraudulent license keys

Improvements:
Improved Java shield in corporate environments
Improved exploit telemetry
Removed duplicate default shields for portable browsers

Fixes:
Fixed issue when printing to Adobe PDF
Fixed issue with Speedbit Download Accelerator
Fixed issue with plugins from PowerDVD and GAS Tecnologia
Fixed issue with certain exclusions not respected
Fixed issue with Knowledge Coach Office Add-In
Fixed issue with false positive from IE
Fixed issue with Foxit Reader startup
Fixed issue with Excel PowerQuery
Fixed issue with Excel DEP Enforcement
