Throughout 2016, many of the attacks and risks in the world of cybercrime followed “analog” crime: holding something for ransom/extortion, propaganda, theft, and identity scams. You might expect a cybersecurity vendor to see these trends as good for business, but in fact it’s the opposite. The modern world relies heavily on the internet and web applications for all types of transactions. For these technologies to continue advancing, users have to feel safe when they conduct those transactions online. That means those of us in the cybersecurity field are dealing with trust as our most valuable commodity. Erode the trust too deeply and many internet users will either take their business elsewhere, or try to avoid online transactions altogether.
Maintaining customers’ trust should always be the core of any cybersecurity provider’s strategy. In 2017, we plan to continue coming up with new ways to use our threat intelligence and cloud-based security platform to do just that. Here’s a look at what’s in store.
Webroot SecureAnywhere® DNS Protection
To kick off the year, we’ve introduced our new Webroot SecureAnywhere® DNS Protection service. By redirecting users’ internet traffic through the Webroot DNS cloud, businesses now get enhanced visibility, control, and peace of mind. Web requests are checked in real time to ensure they are not malware connecting to a Command and Control server, or requests to visit high risk sites. SecureAnywhere DNS Protection also lets businesses fine-tune web access policies by IP address or IP range, and limit access to websites based on their category—with 82 URL categories to choose from. This simple, domain layer security improves productivity, provides great visibility, and is a smart and cost-effective way to dramatically reduce web risks.
Webroot FlowScape®
The second new offering is a state-of-the-art approach to early threat detection that works by analyzing all the traffic taking place within your network; not just communications to and from the internet, but also those that occur between network-connected devices. Using supervised and unsupervised machine learning and behavioral analytics, the Webroot FlowScape® solution cuts through everyday network noise to reveal network anomalies and threats that other security technologies miss, and does so early enough for security administrators to prevent those threats from compromising the network. The FlowScape solution is designed for MSSPs and other IT security professionals who need to identify all the adversarial anomalies and risks within their networks.
Webroot BrightCloud® Streaming Malware Detection
Last, but not least, we are releasing Webroot BrightCloud® Streaming Malware Detection for polymorphic malware protection. This technology detects malicious files as they stream through the network perimeter in real time, without having to download the entire file, and without causing undue network latency. Streaming Malware Detection is designed to be integrated into network security devices to help identify and eliminate malicious files before they enter the network.
2017 will bring many new security challenges, but with these new solutions in place and other innovations on the Webroot drawing board, we plan to keep building our customers’ safety, security and trust.
