Bangladesh Bank Still Attempting to Recover
In the months following one of the largest cyber heists in history, the Bangladesh Central Bank is still in the process of retrieving the $81 Million that was stolen from it, and which remains unaccounted for. The latest update comes from SWIFT, the financial transaction co-op, that has publicly stated that the Bangladesh Central Bank incident was not singular, but rather part of a larger string of cyber attacks. With this declaration, SWIFT has also pushed out a security update that will hopefully make these types of attacks more difficult in the future.
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-cyber-banking-swift-exclusive-idUSKCN0XM2DI
Uber User’s Data Security is Not So Secure
With the rise in app-based ride services across the globe, Uber riders are seeing spikes in fraudulent charges from distant locations. In other words, users are getting charged for rides they couldn’t possibly have been on. While Uber is still confident they’ve had no security breach of user information, more and more accounts are popping up on the Dark Web, at surprisingly reasonable costs. The most likely explanation is that consumers are using the same usernames and passwords for multiple apps, an ill-advised practice that’s not secure by default, which could be causing the harvesting of these credentials.
http://www.csoonline.com/article/3059461/data-breach/uber-fraud-scammer-takes-the-ride-victim-gets-the-bill.html?
Qatar National Bank is the Latest Financial Target of Cyber Attacks
In the past week, Qatar National Bank has stated they were the victim of a cyber attack, which allowed 1.4GB-worth of sensitive customer information to be leaked onto the Dark Web. Among the data, researchers have found transactions and other financial records of many high profile clients, including the Qatar Royal Family, possible intelligence agents from around the world, and even data on Al Jazeera employees. Qatar National Bank has made no confirmation of a security breach, although the leaked information would appear to be legitimate.
http://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/large-qatari-bank-investigating-alleged-data-breach-38698362
Lifeboat Breach Could Lead to More Vulnerabilites
Recently, it was reported that Lifeboat Network, a Minecraft server provider, was hacked, with usernames/passwords being compromised. While Lifeboat issued a password reset to all users, who aren’t required to enter any personal or financial information when creating a login, users should still be cautious if they have re-used their passwords for other sites and change their passwords if this is the case.
https://www.helpnetsecurity.com/2016/04/27/lifeboat-data-breach/
Dating Site Exposes User Data
This week, yet another online dating site has been hacked and this time, the personal information of over 1 million individuals has been leaked. The site in question, Beautifulpeople.com, has stated that the leaked data was from a test server containing no user data. The server, which had no admin password to access, has since been taken offline.
https://www.wired.com/2016/04/beautiful-people-hack/
Separate tags with commas
SWIFT, Uber, Bangladesh Central Bank Breach, Dating site breach, Uber data security, data security, Minecraft, Lifeboat breach, cyber attacks, financial breach
