Up2Date 7.306 Released: Appliance Ram Upgrades Available

Greetings! Astaro has released Up2Date Package 7.306 this morning, which is now being published to our Up2Date servers for distribution. This Up2Date is for a single purpose, which is designed to inform our Astaro Security Gateway appliance users about the upcoming 7.400 release and allow them to prepare by taking advantage of some new offerings for certain appliance models. Read on for the full story.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

February 02, 2009

Network up2date

Greetings! Astaro has released Up2Date Package 7.306 this morning, which is now being published to our Up2Date servers for distribution. This Up2Date is for a single purpose, which is designed to inform our Astaro Security Gateway appliance users about the upcoming 7.400 release and allow them to prepare by taking advantage of some new offerings for certain appliance models. Read on for the full story.

Overview
Please read this message carefully, as it contains important information about new options for certain ASG appliance owners. Astaro users have always enjoyed the ability to upgrade their appliances across even major versions, usually removing the need to buy all new appliances just for software-versioning’s sake. This does however mean that appliances with more dated hardware specifications can be stressed as more features are added (and enabled by the user) as we progress. ASG 7.306 will analyze the memory usage of your appliance, and if in the past 7 days the memory usage has gone above 70%, a notifier screen will be published to the Up2Date screen WebAdmin, informing you that for a good 7.400 experience with the new features, you should consider an upgrade, outlined below.
Please read this message carefully, as it contains important information about new options for certain ASG appliance owners. Because the upcoming 7.400 release adds dozens of new features and hundreds of changes, we have decided to offer memory upgrades to certain appliances to give even more life to the platforms. These available upgrades will be only for the ASG 110/120, ASG 220, and ASG 320 products. New Memory Requirements for ASG The minimum recommended RAM for 7.400 and Astaro Security Gateway UTM appliances is 1024MB, and while the number of features, combined with the number of users/load, will ultimately determine if this upgrade is needed for your existing appliances at this time. As such, you are not required to purchase any of these upgrade options, but they exist for you should you wish to take advantage of them.
New Memory Configurations Starting today, all new ASG 110/120, 220, and 320 appliances will ship with newly upgraded memory configurations. Specifically: -The ASG 110/120 will now have 1GB (1024MB) of memory. -The ASG 220 will now have 1GB (1024MB) of memory. -The ASG 320 will now have 2GB (2048MB) of memory.
Memory Upgrade Kits For current users of ASG 110/120, ASG 220, and ASG 320 appliances, we have made every effort to provide you with options for extending the capabilities of your platform. -Owners of the ASG 110/120 Revision’s 1 and 2 can purchase an official 1GB upgrade kit -Owners of the ASG 220 Revision 2 can purchase an official 1GB upgrade kit -Owners of the ASG 320 (all models) can purchase an official 2GB upgrade kit These kits are certified by Astaro as fully compatible with your appropriate appliance, and include detailed instructions as to how to upgrade the memory in your unit.
Appliance Trade-In Option Owners of the ASG 110/120 Revision 0, and the ASG 220, Revision 1, are not able to purchase upgrade kits due to these units not supporting more than 512MB of memory. For these owners, we have made available very special unit-exchange pricing which will allow you to purchase the latest version of the ASG 110/120 or ASG 220 at a special trade-in price.
Availability Both the memory upgrade kits, and appliance trade-ins are now available, so that our users have plenty of time to prepare before Version 7.400 launches later this month. If you would like pricing information for your region, or are unsure of your model and would like clarification which upgrade options are available to you, please contact your Astaro Partner, Distributor, or Sales Representative for more information.
IMPORTANT NOTE In order to ensure your warranty remains intact, and the operation of your ASG appliance continues error-free, we must stress that using non-Astaro memory upgrades may cause serious side-effects to your appliance operation. Our appliances require very specific modules that are purpose tested for quality, performance, and meet strict specification guidelines. Using non-Astaro memory upgrades may cause your appliance to not boot, boot but with reduced memory capacity, or even boot fine and cause kernel panics, disk errors, and other irregular operation. For this reason the upgrade kits have been aggressively priced, as we wish to make these upgrades available to everyone at an affordable cost for extending your appliance’s lifetime.
7.306 Up2Date Details Remarks: Configuration will not be changed
News: – ASG appliances with a high memory usage will see a notifier in the Up2Date section informing them of new memory upgrade options. All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed! In regards to the new features and benefits of AxG 7.3, please read the V7.3 Release Notes PDF. The Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your installed Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version. There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:
1) Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on then Watch Up2Date Progress in new window and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation and the System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished successfully.
2) Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced: (MD5sum: 1e0e21126d3edb1bedf7dbf1c343803f Size: 18771269 bytes)

HTTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 –  Japanese Mirror
FTP: Astaro US – Astaro US2 – Astaro Germany – Astaro Germany2 – Japanese Mirror

Feedback If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the AxG V7 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[7.302] Quarantine Report "). If you have feedback to our documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com. There is also a demo server: http://demo.astaro.com All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!
Your Astaro R&D team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
