Up2Date 8.001 Released

Our first Up2Date package for the new Astaro Security Gateway Version 8 is ready for distribution. Version 8 has enjoyed significant popularity in the past month, with thousands of new and existing customers experiencing V8's features and stability.

Written by
Angelo Comazzetto

August 12, 2010

Network up2date

Our first Up2Date package for the new Astaro Security Gateway Version 8 is ready for distribution. Version 8 has enjoyed significant popularity in the past month, with thousands of new and existing customers experiencing V8’s features and stability.

You will find 8.001 available for install via Up2Date on your installation. Mainly a bug fix release, this package will enhance the stability and operation of ASG V8, and addresses an issue with Unix time affecting certificates. Read on for the full details of this Up2Date.
This release fixes some bugs with how Web Application Security handles connections for protection of Outlook Web Access servers, optimizing that communication. We have also adjusted the very popular Country Blocking to ensure traffic can flow to essential Astaro Internet resources (Eg. RED provisioning servers, global email scanning repositories etc.) so that your blocking choices won’t interfere with ASG operations. In addition, some other bugs were addressed and some hardware glitches for our software users and their platforms of choice were solved.
On addressing the Unix Time issue:
ASG uses certificates for different purposes (such as for each user that is created) and CAs (certificate authorities) for signing the certificates mentioned before. When performing the initial setup, some CAs as well as the admin certificate are generated.
When passing a certain point in time the theoretical end-date for our certs and CAs is beyond 19 January 2038 which will cause trouble to the system as the end-date of a cert/CA must not be before the start-date.
*SUMMARY NOTICE*
Any and all systems which have this up2date applied before the end of August 2010 will be completely free from troubles or consequences as a result of this global Linux/Unix issue. If you apply it, you can avoid needing to educate yourself further.
For units which are not updated before then, we will issue a single fix for this bug via a specially crafted pattern Up2Date as well, which will be automatically patched/applied without updating the firmware version.
If you would like more education on this issue, you can read more about it here via Wikipedia’s entry: Year 2038 problem.
Official Details
Download Information
Link: ftp://ftp.astaro.de/pub/ASG/v8/up2date/u2d-sys-8.001.tgz.gpg
Size: 81MB
MD5Sum: eaf81f4137425f04fd6a512f7e6285ec
Remarks:

System will be rebooted.
Configuration will be updated.
HTTP Proxy cache will deleted.

News:

This Up2Date should be applied before end of August 2010
Added: HTML rewriting in Web Application Firewall.
Fixed: Country based blocking can no longer block essential ASG functionality.
Added exceptions for spam scanning servers, ACC, notification smarthost, NTP servers, and SNMP trap sinks.

Fixes:
[14688]: UNIX Epoch ends in 9999 days, so certificates cannot last longer
[14364] ASG does not use ESMTP for "Skip TLS negotiation hosts"
[14400] WAF disabled in predefined reverse proxy profiles
[14427] No successful boot with Perc H200
[14469] Country Blocking blocks essential services
[14519] GRUB fails to install properly on some HP servers
[14637]: Bridge interface gets unresponsive after change of IP addresses
[14735]: ASG 625a with versions 8 and 8.001 recognizing NIC order wrong
[14759]: Setting system time forward causes WebAdmin to get unresponsive for a while
For the ASG 8.0 Release Notes click here.
Astaro Up2Date technology makes it easy to upgrade your Astaro Security Gateway to the latest version.
There are two ways to apply an Up2Date package to the system:
1) Log on to WebAdmin, navigate to Management >> Up2Date >> Overview and use Update to latest version now to install the Firmware Up2Date. Click on the "Watch Up2Date Progress in new window" and an extra browser window will show the progress of the Up2Date installation. (The System administrator will receive a notification email once the Up2Date process has finished.)
2) Download the Up2Date package from our HTTP or FTP Server and install it under Management >> Up2Date >> Advanced:
Astaro AxG Up2Date Download Mirrors:

Astaro US
Astaro US2
Astaro Germany
Astaro Germany2

Feedback

If you want to provide feedback or want to discuss any of the ASG V8 features you should post it on our User Bulletin Board. Please take care to add always(!) the version you refer to (e.g. "[8.001] WAN Link Balancing Question").
If you have any feedback on our help, manual, or any documentation (Online Help) please send it to docu@astaro.com.
There is also a demo server for public use: http://demo.astaro.com

(All Up2Dates are GNUPG-signed!)
Regards,
The Astaro Product Management Team

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on LinkedIn
